Advertisement
Supported by
In an interview with black journalists, the former vice president cited his support among black voters to push back on criticism of his candidacy as focused on the white working class.
WASHINGTON — Joseph R. Biden Jr. on Tuesday pressed his case that he is the “most electable” Democratic presidential nominee, saying that while his primary rivals may draw large crowds in urban centers or excite young progressives, he retains the most racially diverse coalition of supporters. 
The argument, bolstered by Mr. Biden’s strong poll numbers among black voters, accentuates the central thesis of his candidacy: that he is the Democrat most capable of beating President Trump. 
It also comes as the Democratic field has winnowed in recent weeks, with some polls showing the race as increasingly a battle of three candidates — the more moderate Mr. Biden and the race’s two progressive New England senators, Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts. 
Mr. Biden’s communications director, Kate Bedingfield, made a similar argument in a television interview Tuesday. “No Democrat is going to win the nomination for president of the United States without African-American support,” she said. “And nor should they.”
“I have never, ever, ever, in my entire life, had a circumstance where I have felt uncomfortable in the black community,” Mr. Biden said in the group interview. He said the same was not true of some liberals. 
“There are assumptions made about the black community that I don’t think are accurate,” he said, and “that’s partly because they haven’t spent much time in the black community.”
He also used the forum to harshly criticize Mr. Trump, asking the group to imagine if a school principal used some of Mr. Trump’s words.
“The first thing you’d do is to go in there and make sure that son of a bi — that person — was fired,” Mr. Biden said, quickly correcting himself. 
In another part of the interview, Mr. Biden said there were “three categories” of white people when it comes to race issues in America. 
Asked why Republicans would work with him as president, when they repeatedly blocked President Barack Obama’s policy proposals, Mr. Biden said he would be able to apply unique political pressure on Republicans because he could appeal directly to their voters. 
“Part of the role of a president is to persuade,” he said. If Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, were to block him, he said, “Guess what? I’m going to go to Kentucky, and I’m going to campaign.” 
Other polling has shown Mr. Biden comfortably ahead, including among black voters. But in early-voting primary states, and particularly in Iowa, the race has often appeared fluid, with months to go before the first votes are cast.
In his comments, Mr. Biden acknowledged the unpredictability of the nomination contest, drawing a comparison to Mr. Obama’s victory in Iowa in 2008.
“I got blown out in Iowa, and all of a sudden, everything changed,” Mr. Biden said. “Barack clobbered me.”
Advertisement
