Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — Representative Steve King of Iowa, who has a history of issuing racist remarks and demeaning insults about immigrants, seemingly joked on Tuesday about the Chinese government’s mass detention and mistreatment of Uighurs, a predominantly Muslim ethnic group.
“The Uighurs, the Muslims in China — a million of them — they’re being put into camps, and they’re taking their children away, and raising them, and then they’re sterilizing the women,” Mr. King, a Republican, said at a town hall-style meeting. He went on to explain the tactics of the Chinese government’s cultural campaign against the Uighurs, telling constituents that Beijing had forced detainees to change their clothing and diet, “which includes trying to force the Muslims to eat pork.”
“That’s actually the only part of that that I agree with, is, everybody ought to eat pork,” Mr. King, a Republican, said, drawing scattered chuckles from the room. “If we have a shortage of bacon you can’t be happy.”
“I don’t want people doing my pork that won’t eat it, let alone hope I go to hell for eating pork chops,” he said.
“No takin’ bacon off our tables—ever!” he tweeted. “Sweden has capitulated to halal.”
Mr. King, who is running for a 10th term, is facing his most serious primary race challenge in years. The challenger, State Senator Randy Feenstra, has gained traction with conservatives weary of Mr. King’s penchant for making racist comments. Should Mr. King survive the primary, he is likely to face a bruising rematch against J. D. Scholten, the Democrat he beat in 2018 by about 10,000 votes.
Republicans have for years largely dodged Mr. King’s comments while seeking out his endorsement as a presidential kingmaker in the crucial Iowa caucuses, even as he promoted white nationalists and neo-Nazis on Twitter and made outlandish and racist claims, including infamously stating that undocumented immigrants have “calves the size of cantaloupes because they’re hauling 75 pounds of marijuana across the desert.”
Advertisement
