Advertisement
Supported by
Fact Check
The president made inaccurate claims about planes, trade, automobiles, China and Iran during events with world leaders on Monday. 
What President Trump Said
What Mr. Trump Said
“We’ve picked up $20 trillion in worth. And China has lost $20, $25, $30 trillion in worth. We’re now almost double the size the economy.”
It is unclear what Mr. Trump was referring to, but none of the typical metrics used to evaluate changes in “worth” back his description. 
China’s growth has “slowed down a lot, but it hasn’t contracted,” said Derek Scissors, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute who studies the Chinese economy.
The market capitalization for both the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges totaled $8 trillion in November 2017, and declined to about $7.5 trillion in July 2019, according to Jennifer Carpenter, a professor of finance at New York University’s Stern School of Business who studies Chinese markets. 
What Mr. Trump said
“If I hadn’t won, our economy now would have been overtaken by China.”
Projections for when China’s economy would — if ever — overtake the United States’ economy to become the largest in the world have varied greatly.
Those earlier estimates were clearly wrong, and China’s economic slowdown, the consequence of Beijing’s own policies more than Mr. Trump’s trade war, “has put off the date,” Mr. Scissors said. 
Mr. Dollar also dismissed the projections: “There was never any chance that they were going to surpass the U.S. economy in a year or two” before Mr. Trump took office. He added that Mr. Trump’s trade wars may have taken half a percentage point off China’s annual growth, but “that’s pretty minor.” 
“He deserves some of the credit,” Mr. Scissors said. “He’s just taking all of it.” 
What Mr. Trump Said
“And my first step with Japan was to say, “You have to move car companies into the United States.” And they did. Many car companies are now operating plants in the United States and building plants in the United States.”
But beyond new plant openings, Japanese automakers have invested billions in manufacturing expansions, research and development, warehousing and distribution, and administrative additions since 2008.
What Mr. Trump Said
In return, Iran agreed to not build a nuclear bomb. Whether the deal’s provisions or enforcement mechanisms were strict enough is a matter of opinion, but the United States and the other signers of the agreement did not get “nothing.”
What Mr. Trump Said
“Look what happened, where they’re bringing plane loads of cash, plane loads, big planes, 757s, Boeing 757s coming in loaded up with cash.”
What Mr. Trump Said
“But the E.U. is another one. We’ve been losing $180 billion a year for many years.”
Advertisement
