Advertisement
Supported by
It’s “personal to me,” the former vice president says in a new ad that features his own family losses to highlight the importance of health care. 
In the 60-second television spot, called “Personal,” Mr. Biden tells the stories of his family tragedies that he often shares on the campaign trail as he discusses the importance of health care access. But the ad is striking for the wrenching images of Mr. Biden with his two sons who survived a car crash that killed his first wife and a daughter in 1972. One of those children, Beau Biden, would die of cancer in 2015, a development that drew widespread sympathy in Washington and around the country toward the end of Mr. Biden’s second term in the Obama administration. 
“I couldn’t imagine what it would have been like if we didn’t have the health care they needed immediately,” Mr. Biden says in the spot.
The new spot is not just about family tragedy; it is described by the campaign as a health care ad, touching on an issue that was critical to the Democrats’ victories in the 2018 midterm elections.
The commercial obliquely makes an argument Mr. Biden often advances more directly on the campaign trail: that his Democratic opponents who support “Medicare for all,” a single-payer health care system, are by default supporting the replacement of the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. Mr. Biden’s opponents say their goal is to further expand robust health care coverage.
As he often does, Mr. Biden highlights his relationship with former President Barack Obama to argue for expanding on the current health care law rather than pursuing a more sweeping measure. Emphasizing his partnership with Mr. Obama, a respected figure in the Democratic Party, has been a central strategy in Mr. Biden’s campaign.
“Health care is personal to me,” Mr. Biden says. “Obamacare is personal to me. When I see the president try to tear it down and others propose to replace it and start over, that’s personal to me too. We’ve got to build on what we did because every American deserves affordable health care.”
Advertisement
