Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — Call it the art of the mini-deal.
The Trump administration is on the cusp of announcing a new trade deal with India, potentially within the next week as President Trump prepares to meet with Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India.
It should be a proud moment for Mr. Trump, who is eager to announce new markets for American farmers and manufacturers who have been badly hit by his trade war with China. But unlike traditional trade pacts, which cover nearly all sectors of the economy, the India deal appears likely to be confined to only a few sectors and products.
Mini-deals are becoming something of a trend for Mr. Trump ahead of the 2020 election. In addition to India, he is expected to soon announce a limited trade agreement with Japan.
While smaller deals may prove easier to win than comprehensive agreements, they are raising concerns among some lawmakers and businesses about the precedent Mr. Trump is setting by striking limited pacts that could leave significant issues unresolved.
They also run afoul of the World Trade Organization, which requires members to draft deals that cover “substantially all trade” to prevent countries from unfairly discriminating against one another. But Mr. Trump has not been concerned with violating the organization’s rules in the past, and his advisers are framing the deals as an “early harvest” that will ultimately put the United States on a path toward bigger, more comprehensive trade agreements.
But the deal would not cover some of the more contentious issues between India and the United States, like India’s barriers to American technology firms, and how both countries should go about countering security threats from China. The two sides have discussed the potential for a broader trade deal in recent months, but negotiators have decided that too many disagreements remain, at least for now.
The United States-India trading relationship has become increasingly tense, with the Trump administration deeply frustrated with India’s trade barriers to medical devices, agricultural goods, electronics and digital trade. Mr. Trump’s move to impose tariffs on Indian steel and to revoke a special trading status for its goods similarly rankled Indian lawmakers.
India has a longstanding trade relationship with Iran and is chafing at the American embargo on Iranian oil, which has forced India to turn elsewhere for supplies. The United States, meanwhile, has been leaning hard on India to ban Huawei, the Chinese telecom giant, from supplying equipment for the next generation of wireless technology, known as 5G, over security concerns.
The Trump administration is also pressing to eliminate the American trade deficit with India, a goal that the Indians consider unrealistic.
Nisha Biswal, the president of the U.S.-India Business Council at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, said starting with a smaller deal makes sense because the countries have not agreed on much in the past when it comes to trade.
“For most of our trading history, we have come at each other more as combatants than collaborators,” she said. “We should start with these building blocks and move toward a more comprehensive architecture over time.”
But the size of the agreement with India, as well as Japan, differs significantly from previous United States trade deals, like the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Those deals include nearly every sector of the economy, and have rules on how countries manage their currencies, process trade and resolve trade disputes, among many other issues.
Stephen Claeys, a trade lawyer at Wiley Rein, said the strategy also reflected on the administration’s desire to approach trade negotiations in a different way than in the past.
“In the past, nothing was agreed to until everything was agreed to, and you had these broad, comprehensive agreements that covered whole swathes of issues,” he said. “I think they’re purposefully breaking from that model.”
Mr. Trump’s more transactional approach to striking trade deals could prove popular in particular with American farmers, who have lost markets in China, Europe, Mexico and elsewhere as foreign countries retaliated to Mr. Trump’s trade war. But it has ruffled many in the business community who are fighting for broader interests.
Wendy Cutler, a vice president at the Asia Society Policy Institute, who led negotiations over the TPP during the Obama administration, said the mini-deal with Japan left out a wide range of topics that were addressed in that agreement — including customs issues, environment, standards issues, intellectual property protection, state-owned enterprises, services and pharmaceuticals.
“The list goes on and on,” she said. “A number of industry groups are very concerned that their issues and their concerns were not addressed in the first stage.”
Ana Swanson reported from Washington, and Vindu Goel from Mumbai, India.
Advertisement
