Advertisement
Supported by
An organic effort by black millennials and Gen Z-ers to influence older family members against Mr. Biden may be important in the Democratic primary.
Tyler Smith, 19, texted his grandmother after the debate, hopeful that Mr. Biden's meandering answer may have swayed her from supporting him. 
“I think I’m definitely influencing them,” Ms. St. Romain said of her family members. “But my dad is definitely still pro-Biden. And I don’t really argue with him.” 
But if he is to be overtaken by one of his more progressive rivals, the most powerful tool against him may not be opposition research or negative advertisements. Instead, it may be an organic effort by younger black voters — concerned about Mr. Biden’s age and more moderate ideology — to sway their older family members.
Still, Mr. Biden, by his own admission, would be unwise to underestimate the lobbying efforts of those who are young and politically engaged. At a gathering of the New Hampshire Young Democrats in July, Mr. Biden said the same phenomenon — young people converting their skeptical parents — had helped fuel his own ascension in politics almost 47 years ago, when he was elected to the Senate as a fresh-faced 29-year-old. 
For Mr. Biden, though, students carried mixed feelings. They respected his tenure as Barack Obama’s vice president, but implicitly rejected his campaign’s central premise, that the primary goal of Democrats in the 2020 election should be defeating President Trump. 
They pointed to systemic problems they said the country must address, such as inequality, climate change and gun violence. The Democratic nominee, they said, should embrace progressive proposals like canceling student loan debt, the Green New Deal and gun buyback programs. 
Jaylan Jones, 20, said, “Older people have that conservative outlook on things,” even older black Democrats. 
“Young people don’t want Biden. We want Beto. We want Bernie,” said Ms. Jones, a junior. “I think we can convince them.” 
“Black people are strategic voters, particularly older black people,” Mr. Robinson said. “They’re thinking harm reduction. They’re doing a deep analysis about what they think white people will accept and won’t accept.”
He pointed to the last Democratic primary, when younger black voters tracked more toward Mr. Sanders than their older counterparts, who overwhelmingly backed Hillary Clinton. In 2008, younger black voters supported Barack Obama in much bigger numbers than the electorate at large, until his victory in the Iowa Caucus led to a surge of support. 
“Young people are constantly signaling what’s next and what’s possible,” Mr. Robinson said. “And while there’s some love for Biden, but sometimes you’re in a relationship because you’re comfortable and it’s what you know.” 
Another Texas Southern student, Christopher Anwuri, 22, said the generational differences in how black voters saw the primary were fueled by opposing theories of political change: incrementalism versus immediate upheaval. 
“This generation is looking for an instant, quick fix for problems,” he said. Older black people, meanwhile, think “these things need to take time.” 
Jayla Lee, 19, said older black voters “like Biden because he was with Obama, and they feel like since they could trust Obama that means they can trust him.” 
“But the things we endure are not the things they endured,” Ms. Lee said. “And I’m looking for someone who can change the things that affect me.” 
Darren Black, 22, said older generations were always “going to ride” for Mr. Biden, because “Joe was there with Obama.” 
“But the younger generation, we've seen mass shootings, we’re seeing more police brutality — we’re looking at different things,” Mr. Black said. 
Yet contrary to their stereotype as idealistic and apathetic, and with the steely pessimism of seasoned political operatives, younger voters expressed a cleareyed understanding that their efforts to lobby their relatives would not necessarily be successful. 
Asked if she’d had any luck converting her family to more progressive candidates, Ms. Williams, a political science major, said, “I’m making no progress. None. Not even a tiny bit. I wish.”
Mr. Smith, a member of the school’s College Democrats, said he liked Mr. Biden, but preferred his more left-wing rivals, such as Mr. O’Rourke, Mr. Castro, Ms. Harris or Ms. Warren. 
After the debate, he thought about further pestering his grandmother over her support for Mr. Biden, but he reconsidered out of fear of coming off as pushy. 
“You know, it’s grandma, so you got to let her have it,” Mr. Smith said. 
When reached by phone, however, Mr. Smith’s grandmother, Alice Varnado, said his previous lobbying efforts had been more successful than he may have realized. 
Ms. Varnado, 69, said she still preferred Mr. Biden, but that she had grown concerned about his age in recent months. She said she would vote for whichever Democrat earned the nomination, but she now considers Ms. Warren her second choice. 
Her family members — Mr. Smith and his uncle — had convinced her.
“You know, since talking with my grandson and my son, I think I can go with her,” said Ms. Varnado. “I’m starting to like her. There’s been a turning point.” 
Katie Glueck contributed reporting.
Advertisement
