Advertisement
Supported by
The forum in Iowa gave Ms. Warren a chance to showcase her plans to help Native communities — and to address the lingering controversy over her past claims of ancestry.
SIOUX CITY, Iowa — Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, speaking at a presidential forum on Native American issues on Monday, offered a direct, public apology for the “harm” she caused with her past claims of Native American ancestry and pledged to uplift Native people as president.
“Like anyone who’s being honest with themselves, I know that I have made mistakes,” said Ms. Warren, who was met with a standing ovation when she took the stage. “I am sorry for harm I have caused. I have listened and I have learned a lot, and I am grateful for the many conversations that we’ve had together.”
She continued, “It is a great honor to be able to partner with Indian Country, and that’s what I’ve tried to do as a senator, and that’s what I promise I will do as president of the United States of America.”
“Full funding for housing, for health care, for education, for infrastructure — those are not optional,” she said on Monday. “We need to change the rules and make it happen.”
Some of the policy plans Ms. Warren released earlier in her campaign would provide funding to address issues like housing and the opioid crisis in Native American communities. She has also worked on Native American matters in the Senate, sponsoring legislation about suicide prevention and child abuse in Native communities.
“A problem that is not seen is a problem that is not fixed,” Ms. Warren said. “People need to know the scope of this problem.”
OJ and Barb Semans, the co-executive directors of Four Directions, decided that Ms. Warren would not be asked about her ancestry during her appearance, Mr. Semans said in an interview before the event. He said the Warren campaign made no requests about what she would or would not be asked.
Mr. Semans, a member of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe, faulted President Trump for repeatedly calling Ms. Warren “Pocahontas.” He said he had no problem with how Ms. Warren had referred to her ancestry, and that it was more important to spend time on issues that could help the lives of Native Americans, “not whether or not her DNA test was done properly or improperly.”
“How many times do you have to argue something that’s already done?” he asked. “That issue has been dealt with, it’s been taken care of, and we move on. But what hasn’t been dealt with and taken care of is President Trump’s continued use of it in a derogatory way.”
“I urged you to tell your story, and I appreciate that you did,” he said. “What I would say is, from here forward, because now we’re in a presidential election, that we take Michelle Obama’s advice and when he goes low, you go high.”
It remains to be seen how much the ancestry issue will linger over Ms. Warren as the campaign goes on. At a rally in New Hampshire last week, Mr. Trump repeated the “Pocahontas” slur and promised there would be more to come.
“I did the Pocahontas thing,” he said. “I hit her really hard, and it looked like she was down and out, but that was too long ago. I should have waited. But don’t worry, we will revive it.”
“I don’t think it was necessary for her to do that,” he said, adding that Ms. Warren came across as “pretty in tune, actually, to what’s going on with Indian Country.” 
Tony Brown, 68, a member of the Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin, said of Ms. Warren, “I think she’s got her message down pat.”
“Actions speak louder than words,” he said. “But she has some good actions going for her, so we will see.”
But no amount of outreach or contrition from Ms. Warren will make the issue go away entirely among other Native Americans, said Mark Trahant, the editor of Indian Country Today, who is moderating the forum.
“There is a significant group, mostly on Twitter but significant nonetheless, who will never take any apology from her,” he said. “They see it as a felony.”
“It seems like she’s not willing to really engage or name, even, the harm that she’s caused,” he said in an interview. “The harm is that she has shifted the conversation towards DNA testing, towards biology, towards family lore.”
“I say that every time they ask about Elizabeth’s family instead of the issues of vital importance to Indian Country, they feed the president’s racism,” she said. “Elizabeth knows she will be attacked, but she’s here to be an unwavering partner in our struggle because that is what a leader does.”
Ms. Haaland then offered a stinging appraisal of Mr. Trump: “I say the president who worships Andrew Jackson, who coddles white supremacists and defends Vladimir Putin, who cages children and freely admitted to assaulting women, is no match for a woman with a plan.”
Advertisement
