Advertisement
Supported by
Mr. Barr announced that the bureau’s acting director, Hugh Hurwitz, was being reassigned to run its re-entry services division and to help carry out President Trump’s prison overhaul agenda. Mr. Barr named Kathleen Hawk Sawyer, who ran the prisons bureau from 1992 to 2003, to replace him.
The intense public interest in the case is also fueled by the Justice Department’s handling of an earlier sex trafficking investigation into Mr. Epstein that resulted in a nonprosecution deal, as well as by unfounded conspiracy theories about the financier’s powerful friends that blossomed in the days after he died.
Prosecutors in Manhattan said Mr. Epstein lured dozens of underage girls into giving him erotic massages and engaging in other sexual acts in the early 2000s at his mansions in Manhattan and in Palm Beach, Fla. The girls were paid hundreds of dollars in cash for the encounters and, once recruited, were asked to return several times, where they were abused again, according to court papers.
He has also vowed to address the shortcomings that Mr. Epstein’s death exposed at the Bureau of Prisons, which administers more than 120 facilities that hold over 177,000 inmates. The bureau, one of the Justice Department’s most troubled components, is facing congressional and department scrutiny over staffing shortages, funding issues, workplace harassment, violence and gang activity.
Although staffing shortages existed before Mr. Trump took office, a governmentwide hiring freeze imposed four days into his administration pushed the Bureau of Prisons’s employment into a downward spiral. The freeze was lifted elsewhere in April 2017, but it stayed in place at the bureau for several more months.
As of December 2016, 16,623 correctional officers worked in the Bureau of Prisons system, according to data provided by the agency. As of today, 15,012 work for the bureau, the lowest level in at least six years.
Suicides in the federal prison system have increased during the Trump administration, according to data provided by the bureau. In the fiscal year that ended in September, 27 inmates committed suicide across the system, which includes federal correctional institutions, privately contracted Bureau of Prisons correctional institutions, and community custody, like halfway houses. That is a nearly 70 percent increase from the 2016 fiscal year, when 16 inmates committed suicide.
The last inmate suicide at the Metropolitan Correction Center, before Mr. Epstein killed himself, was in 2006, according to the agency.
Mr. Barr and Ms. Sawyer have a history working together: He also named her to the post in 1992 during his first stint as attorney general, when she became the first woman to run the Bureau of Prisons.
Eileen Sullivan contributed reporting.
Advertisement
