Democrats say they believe there is already enough evidence to name Trump as a co-conspirator in the episode that resulted in his former attorney, Michael Cohen, pleading guilty to two campaign finance charges. 
The hush-money inquiry will open a new chapter in the House’s months-long consideration of whether to draft articles of impeachment against the president.
The new congressional inquiry will reopen questions about the extent of Trump’s involvement in the episode — and whether he would have been charged if not for Justice Department opinions that a sitting president cannot be indicted.
“The fingerprints are all over this one — it’s not like a big mystery,” said Rep. Jamie B. Raskin (D-Md.), a member of the Judiciary panel. “As with the evidence of presidential obstruction of justice, the conclusion seems inescapable: that [Trump] would have been tried had he been anybody else. And now it’s left to Congress again to figure out what to do with the lawbreaking and apparent impunity of the president.”
Trump, his aides and attorneys have made contradictory statements about the president’s knowledge of the payments. But his lawyers have repeatedly denied that Trump committed wrongdoing.
“No campaign violations were engaged in by the president,” said Jay Sekulow, Trump’s personal attorney.
AMI complied with a document request Democrats made earlier this year, giving the committee all communications it previously turned over to law enforcement, according to the people familiar with the inquiry.
A lawyer for Pecker, Elkan Abramowitz, declined to comment. AMI declined to comment.
The conclusion of the campaign finance investigation this summer surprised some former federal prosecutors and legal experts, who noted that other participants in the alleged scheme were granted immunity or non-prosecution agreements, which often signal that the case is focused on additional targets.
“It’s inconceivable Michael Cohen acted alone … what happened?” said Duncan Levin, a former prosecutor for the Justice Department and Manhattan District Attorney’s Office. “When you have one of the most important, sensitive investigations into the president and his family and his company, and then when you unexpectedly drop it, it is going to raise a lot of questions.”
A Justice Department spokesman in Washington referred questions to the U.S. attorney’s office of the Southern District of New York, which declined to comment.
The hush-money payments represent a sixth instance of potentially impeachable presidential misbehavior, they say.
The scheme began in the final months of the 2016 campaign, when Cohen has said there was building fear in Trump’s inner circle that McDougal and Daniels would go public with allegations that they had sexual encounters with Trump years earlier.
“Then why did Michael Cohen make [the payment], if there was no truth to her allegations?” a reporter asked.
“You’ll have to ask Michael Cohen,” Trump said. 
In testimony before the House Oversight Committee in February, Cohen said Trump had assured him in an Oval Office meeting that he would take care of Cohen’s debt related to Daniels, which Cohen had financed through a line of credit. 
“I am going to jail in part because of my decision to help Mr. Trump hide that payment from the American people before they voted a few days later,” he said.
Prosecutors said AMI officials knew “expenditures by corporations, made for purposes of influencing an election and in coordination with or at the request of a candidate or campaign, are unlawful,” the agreement said. 
The document acknowledged that AMI’s main purpose was “to suppress the model’s story so as to prevent it from influencing the election,” the agreement said.
As part of the deal, AMI agreed to cooperate with any law enforcement agency pursuing the matter and to train executives and editorial employees on election laws and their application to media operations.
In July, the federal judge supervising the case, William H. Pauley III, said that “the government has effectively concluded its investigations” of who besides Cohen was involved. 
A lawyer for the Trump Organization, Alan Futerfas, declined to comment.
New York University law professor Stephen Gillers called it “troublesome” that the campaign finance case ended without providing more answers, arguing that “it would disserve the public interest if the Justice Department did not eventually disclose who else was party to Michael Cohen’s crime.”
“There is clear evidence that one or more people participated in Cohen’s crime,” he said. “We just don’t know who they are and whether they are subject to investigation and could still be prosecuted.”
Karl Sandstrom, a former member of the Federal Election Commission, said that based on his review of the matter, prosecutors in Manhattan had an “exceedingly strong case.” He questioned why they did not pursue others involved. 
“They saw fit to put Michael Cohen in jail,” he said. “Why aren’t the people who authorized and paid for this culpable?”
House Democrats saw his comments as an indication that they should pick up the investigation, according to aides familiar with their investigative plans.
The documents included notes of an FBI agent that stated, “Based on the timing of these calls, and the content of the text messages and emails, I believe that at least some of these communications concerned the need to prevent Clifford from going public.” 
As part of the probe, Democrats are expected to put a spotlight on Trump’s evolving explanations about what he knew of the scheme, according to the people familiar with the strategy. They also hope to review a Justice Department decision to end the hush-money query by pressing Attorney General William P. Barr about it directly in a future hearing. 
