Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — President Trump heads into the closing months of the year before he faces re-election without a clear policy agenda and with an uphill path to achieving any major new accomplishments before he faces voters.
Over a summer dominated by his personal attacks on Democratic lawmakers, the news media and his trade showdown with China, Mr. Trump spent little time clarifying his positions on several important agenda items that could bolster his record.
And as official Washington returns to work, it is unclear whether Mr. Trump intends to focus his time and attention on his policy goals, or whether he will step into a full-bore campaign mode, escalating attacks on his political rivals and spurning traditional governance.
“Does he want a few more wins? Of course. Everything is a competition with him, he’s extraordinarily impatient, and he would spend every week signing bills — any bills — if he could,” said Brendan Buck, who served as a spokesman for the former Republican speaker, Paul D. Ryan. “At the same time, he’s far removed from the normal convention of how we look at presidents. His supporters care far more about the persona than the policy,” Mr. Buck added.
Speaking to reporters at the White House on Wednesday, Mr. Trump did little to clarify his intentions, saying that he was considering “many different concepts and many different things” on the subject.
And in a statement, a White House spokesman said that Mr. Trump, who has boasted of being the most successful president in history, has already kept his promise to deliver “greatness” to the country.
"Along with record job growth, rising wages, fair and reciprocal trade deals, energy independence, lower prescription drug prices, criminal justice reform, securing our border and judicial appointments who uphold the Constitution, this president is helping America win again, but his work is far from over,” said the spokesman, Judd Deere.
To be sure, Mr. Trump faces obstacles to scoring policy victories that would be worthy of applause lines at his campaign rallies. Many House Democrats would rather impeach him than hand him legislative victories that could bolster his re-election chances. And his efforts to defang American enemies have run up against intransigent foreign leaders as well as resistance from both allies and his own advisers.
But a crucial factor is a president whose fleeting attention span, impatience with policy details and appetite for personal feuds and news media controversies make for a limited interest in traditional legislating and regulating.
Mr. Trump’s primary focus for winning re-election, said the Republican pollster David Winston, is to connect his actions as president to positive economic news “in such a way that people understand and see how it’s personally translating in their lives.”
“He’s got one responsibility, and that’s to effectively drive his narrative,” Mr. Winston said. “Everything he does has to be put in the context of, ‘Will this help the narrative?’”
That inevitably drew attention to the persistent question of how hard the president is willing to work on his priorities, as opposed to talking about them in public. Multiple Democratic presidential candidates have criticized Mr. Trump, who for years ridiculed Mr. Obama’s golf outings, for the amount of time he devotes to golf.
Republicans said they do see theoretical opportunities for Mr. Trump to score notable victories, if House Democrats are willing to help deliver them. Perhaps the most significant would be congressional ratification of Mr. Trump’s United States-Mexico-Canada trade agreement, a renegotiated version of the NAFTA trade pact that is commonly known as the U.S.M.C.A. Trump administration officials have been working in earnest on Capitol Hill for months to approve the trade deal, but it is unclear whether Ms. Pelosi will support a vote.
Another, as mentioned in Trump’s Tuesday tweet, is legislation to lower prescription drug prices. But it is unclear whether Democrats and Republicans can reach consensus on that issue.
Mr. Trump has more freedom of action on foreign policy and trade, which offer him some prospects for breakthroughs, if few easy deliverables.
The most likely is a potential agreement with the Taliban that would begin the phased withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan and allow Mr. Trump to boast that he is winding down an 18-year military conflict with wan public support. But top military officials are worried about a potentially premature exit, and on Wednesday, Mr. Trump said that an agreement “may or may not happen.”
Nor has Mr. Trump indicated that he will revisit the idea of the “very major” middle-class tax cut that he trumpeted in the weeks before the 2018 midterm elections, a subject he quickly dropped. A White House official did say that the president’s agenda includes “tax cuts 2.0,” but did not specify what that meant.
Mr. Buck said that the president might be content to focus on campaigning rather than on policy.
“He was not particularly upset when we lost the House, and that’s because he sees the benefit of having a foil to run against,” he said. “Ultimately he controls what we talk about, and he’s made clear he doesn’t need a policy win to control the conversation, for better or worse.”
Advertisement
