Advertisement
Supported by
The former vice president, at a climate change forum, seemed surprised by a question about Andrew Goldman, the host of one of his fund-raisers. His campaign denied Mr. Goldman was an industry executive. 
Mr. Biden denied Mr. Goldman was a fossil fuel executive. The pledge he signed binds him not to take contributions of more than $200 from “S.E.C.-named executives of fossil fuel companies.’’ The former vice president told the CNN host Anderson Cooper that Mr. Goldman was not listed as an executive in fossil fuel company filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. “That’s what we look at,’’ Mr. Biden said. 
“Well, I didn’t realize he does that,’’ Mr. Biden replied. “I’m going to look at what you just told me and find out if that’s accurate.’’
Moments later, a senior adviser to the Biden campaign, Symone D. Sanders, attempted to rebut the suggestion that Mr. Goldman was an industry executive, writing on Twitter that he is “not involved in the day to day operation” of a fossil fuel company. “He’s not on the board of the company, nor the board of the portfolio company.”
Mr. Goldman is identified as a co-host of the fund-raiser Mr. Biden is scheduled to attend. Attendees are asked to contribute $2,800, according to an invitation.
“We defined the rules of the pledge with the intent of making it easier for candidates to live up to it, not to provide loopholes for candidates to exploit in order to keep raising funding from fossil fuel related sources,” Mr. Turnbull said. 
In his plan to address the climate crisis, Mr. Biden calls for ending subsidies for fossil fuels, and promises that his administration would “take action against fossil fuel companies and other polluters who put profit over people and knowingly harm our environment and poison our communities’ air, land, and water, or conceal information regarding potential environmental and health risks.”
At the end of Mr. Biden’s segment during the climate forum, which included 10 top Democratic presidential candidates, Mr. Cooper returned to the topic to clarify that Mr. Goldman “currently doesn’t have day to day responsibilities” in the gas exporter. 
Mr. Biden said his campaign vets every contribution. 
“What I was told by my staff is that he did not have any responsibility related to the company,” he said, referring to Mr. Goldman. “He was not on the board, he was not involved at all in the operation of the company at all. But if that turns out to be true, then I will not in any way accept his help.” 
Advertisement
