Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — Michigan State University agreed to pay a record $4.5 million federal fine and the university’s provost resigned on Thursday after the Education Department determined that the school failed to report and address claims of sexual abuse by a former team doctor, Lawrence G. Nassar, who was convicted of sex crimes.
The fine was part of a settlement with the department, which initiated two investigations into the university’s handling of abuse by Mr. Nassar and the complicity of William Strampel, a former dean of the university’s College of Osteopathic Medicine. Mr. Nassar, a former doctor for the American women’s gymnastics team, was also an associate professor at the school.
The investigations revealed what department officials called “systemic failure to protect students from sexual abuse” over decades, and the university is now obligated to make sweeping changes to its campus safety operations.
“What transpired at Michigan State was abhorrent, inexcusable, and a total and complete failure to follow the law and protect students,” Education Secretary Betsy DeVos said in a statement. “Michigan State will now pay for its failures.”
The president of Michigan State University, Samuel L. Stanley Jr., pledged immediate action. Among the first was accepting the resignation of June Youatt, the school’s provost, effective immediately.
“In my effort to build a safe and caring campus, we must have a culture of accountability,” said Mr. Stanley, who took his post on Aug. 1.
Mr. Stanley also announced a newly formed oversight committee that will be responsible for ensuring that the university fulfills the requirements outlined in settlement agreements with the department.
“The agreements with U.S. Department of Education further remind us that we failed survivors and our community,” he said.
“This week the U.S. government fined YouTube $170 million for improperly monitoring children’s web activity, and days later that same government fines a $20-plus-billion-dollar institution a mere $4.5 million for knowingly allowing a voracious sexual predator to molest 500-plus women and girls,” he said. “Sadly, it’s obvious that the political leadership of the Department of Education doesn’t give a damn about stopping this type of behavior at America’s colleges.”
Others said that the department’s method of calculating Clery Act fines had always been opaque, so it seemed proper to judge this one by the historical context.
“You have to put it in perspective with other Department of Education fines,” said Brett A. Sokolow, the president of the Association of Title IX Administrators, which polices sexual misconduct on campuses. “It’s the largest in history. So while it’s a relatively small number, it is in context the most egregious violation there’s ever been.”
The department’s federal student aid office found a number of violations of the law, including a failure to properly record and report crime statistics, issue timely warnings to students and staff about episodes that posed threats, and a failure to notify campus security of complaints.
“While the fine is important, of greatest importance to us is the long-term safety of every student,” said Mark A. Brown, the chief operating officer of the Education Department, who oversaw the student aid office.
Separately, Ms. DeVos had ordered the Education Department’s Office for Civil Rights to investigate whether the university met its obligations under Title IX, the federal civil rights law that requires schools to address sexual assaults on campus.
Over the 19-month civil rights investigation, the office reviewed hundreds of sexual assault reports, interviewed 47 witnesses and victims, and read tens of thousands of documents.
That investigation found that university officials did not adequately respond to complaints against Mr. Nassar and Mr. Strampel, had subjected students to a sexually hostile environment, and had repeatedly failed to take appropriate and prompt action when notified of complaints.
“Too many people in power knew about the behaviors and the complaints, and yet the predators continued on the payroll and abused even more students,” Ms. DeVos said.
“The university’s inaction in response to so many complaints about the dean over so many years very likely perpetuated the belief expressed by many that they had no choice but to tolerate the dean’s behavior,” the report said, referring to Mr. Strampel.
For instance, the report described numerous complaints referring to the dean’s “ongoing alleged sexually harassing.” A school provost hosted an informal meeting about a complaint against Mr. Strampel, but the only record of it was a “one-sentence email summary to the vice president for human resources, punctuated with a smiley-face emoji, a response which betrays her failure to appreciate the seriousness of the matter,” the report said.
“For nearly 14 years the dean’s conduct continued unchecked — if not enabled — by the failure of administrators at the highest levels of the University to take appropriate actions to address it,” civil rights investigators said.
It also requires that the school establish a process to extend remedies to Mr. Nassar’s victims, like counseling services, grade adjustments and tuition reimbursement.
“While this agreement applies directly to only one specific university, we expect that this message should be heard loudly and clearly at all universities so that the tragedy at M.S.U. is not repeated elsewhere,” said Kenneth L. Marcus, assistant secretary for civil rights at the Education Department.
Anemona Hartocollis and Mitchell Smith contributed reporting.
Advertisement
