Advertisement
Supported by
Democratic presidential candidates recently spoke of the need to address the adverse effects of global warming on poor and marginalized communities.
It was an acknowledgment, as several candidates put it, that decades of racist and classist policies have concentrated people of color and poor people in the most polluted communities, and that those most immediately and severely affected by climate change are often those with the fewest resources to respond. 
That overburdening is plain to see. When a storm like Hurricane Dorian makes landfall, the people in its path are generally the ones who couldn’t afford to evacuate or who had nowhere to go. Poor people — a disproportionate percentage of whom are people of color — cannot afford to rebuild the way wealthier people can, and their infrastructure is often less resilient and more prone to damage in the first place. Afterward, communities of color often get less attention and federal aid. 
Climate change is not the only problem. Because of decades of housing discrimination — including redlining, as Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., specifically noted — people of color are much more likely than white people to live in polluted neighborhoods. Their water is more likely to be contaminated, as in Flint, Mich., and Newark. They are more likely to have asthma and other health problems caused or aggravated by dirty air.
Leading candidates like Senators Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts did not mince words in Wednesday’s forum. Climate policies, Ms. Warren said, must be designed to help “people who have been displaced, workers who have been displaced, people in communities of color who have for generations now been the ones where the toxic dumps got sited next to their homes.”
Several candidates proposed a variety of policies related to environmental justice.
Mr. Buttigieg promoted his “Douglass Plan” to combat systemic racism, including in housing and health care, and to provide funding for environmentally vulnerable communities. 
Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota highlighted her carbon pricing proposal, revenue from which would be used to “make sure that people are basically held harmless” when climate change damages their homes or livelihoods, she said. 
Former Representative Beto O’Rourke of Texas said he would use revenue from his proposed cap-and-trade system to help people in polluted neighborhoods and flood-prone coastal areas. 
Andrew Yang, the tech entrepreneur, promoted his $1,000-a-month universal basic income proposal. “That would help citizens of this country protect themselves in a natural disaster, because we all know when Hurricane Dorian or Hurricane Harvey hits, who suffers?” he said. “Poor people, people of color, people who don’t have a car they can get into and just drive to some relative’s house.”
But Dr. Bullard said much more was needed.
“The climate proposals that candidates have pushed out are aspirational, and I commend them for doing that,” he said. But, he added: “Breathing clean air should not be aspirational. It should be experiential. Clean drinking water in Flint or Newark — that’s something that should not be aspirational. We should be able to drink clean water right now, not 20 years from now.”
Dr. Martin said that while she was very glad the discussion was happening, it had been oversimplified and, at times, reinforced stereotypes of powerlessness surrounding poor people and communities of color. Environmental justice plans should not only benefit marginalized communities, she said, but also bring them into the policymaking process. 
“We have an opportunity to have a more sophisticated and nuanced conversation,” she said.
Advertisement
