Advertisement
Supported by
Joe Biden defied the activists and attended a fund-raiser co-hosted by Andrew Goldman, a founder of a fossil fuel company.
It is the latest example of tension between Mr. Biden, the poll leader in the Democratic presidential primary, and energized activists who often reflect the mood of the party’s more liberal wing.
The fund-raiser on Thursday evening was co-hosted by Andrew Goldman, a former adviser to Mr. Biden and a co-founder of Western LNG, a company based in Houston that develops export facilities for liquefied natural gas. 
“I just want to be very clear to everyone here: I am committed to not raising money from fossil fuel executives and I am not doing that tonight,” Mr. Biden, the former vice president, said on Thursday, according to a pool report of the fund-raiser. “Climate change presents an existential threat, and it is real.”
“Biden can’t expect to convince Americans that he’s a leader on climate if he’s also cozying up to fossil fuel power players,” said Laura Shindell, an organizer with Food and Water Action, an organization that seeks to ban fracking and prevent new permits and pipelines for it.
The protesters — boisterous, cheerful, sometimes dancing — arrived in numbers that were only a fraction of the crowd that had called for urgent action on climate change outside the site of the climate forum in Manhattan the day before. The relatively small turnout, organizers said, was because of the difficulty of determining the location of the fund-raiser on short notice.
But they said they aimed to continue face-to-face protests to urge candidates and donors to support tough action against greenhouse gas emissions.
“This is one of the most effective things we can do,” said Matthew Miles Goodrich, 26, a fund-raiser for the Sunrise Movement. “My generation is uniquely damaged by the policies that aren’t meeting the challenge of the climate crisis. We really want the candidates who aren’t measuring up to look us in the eye, at the faces of the people they’re condemning in some ways to climate disaster.”
The protest was unusual in the sedate area along Central Park, near the landmark Dakota building, where many of the city’s wealthy liberals, and some conservatives, live in spacious apartments. Bemused passers-by — dog walkers, people with baby strollers, teenagers coming home in private-school sports uniforms — stared at the protest. Some stopped to give their support.
“This is not a little mistake,” said Steven Jackman, 62, a retired computer network technician from Massapequa, N.Y. “Climate change is right now. Fracking is dangerous for the water in New York — people love New York water, it’s the purest — and it’s dangerous all over the country.”
But, he added, it was not surprising that candidates would take money from the fossil fuel industry.
“You can’t expect them not to meet with these people — he needs their money,” Mr. Jackman said.
He discussed the plan at the fund-raiser on Thursday and also appeared to set up a veiled contrast with some of his opponents like Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who talks frequently about her long list of policy plans.
“You have to have plans,” he said, “but you have to be able to execute those plans.”
Anne Barnard covers climate and environment for the Metro desk".  She was Beirut bureau chief from 2012 to 2018. She joined The Times in 2007 after covering the Middle East and the Iraq war for The Boston Globe. 

Advertisement
