Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — Gregory B. Craig, one of Washington’s most prominent Democratic lawyers, was acquitted on Wednesday of a felony charge that he lied to federal authorities about work he did seven years ago for the Ukrainian government.
The jury returned the verdict after fewer than five hours of deliberation. It was a blow to the Justice Department’s effort to more aggressively crack down on undisclosed foreign influence in Washington as well as a vindication of Mr. Craig’s high-risk decision to face a jury and testify in his own defense.
The case was viewed as a test of the Justice Department’s new campaign to enforce a once-obscure foreign lobbying law. Until about two years ago, violators of the statute, known as the Foreign Agents Registration Act, or FARA, typically received only an administrative slap on the wrist.
While Mr. Craig, 74, who served as White House counsel in the first year of the Obama administration, was not accused of violating FARA, he was accused of deceiving the officials who enforce it in an effort to avoid registering as a foreign agent.
The Justice Department’s focus on foreign influence cases has contributed to a wave of disclosures by lobbyists and lawyers. The number of people who have newly registered as foreign agents so far this year is more than twice the number of new registrants in all of 2010.
But some defense lawyers predicted Mr. Craig’s quick acquittal after a three-week trial could dampen the Justice Department’s enthusiasm for similar cases.
Federal prosecutors in New York have been scrutinizing the actions of at least two other well-known lobbyists who worked with Mr. Manafort on Ukraine’s behalf: Vin Weber, a former Republican congressman, and Tony Podesta, the brother of John D. Podesta, who led Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign. It is unclear where those inquiries stand and whether Mr. Craig’s acquittal might affect decisions by the prosecutors about how to proceed.
In Mr. Craig’s case, jurors weighed his reputation as an illustrious Washington lawyer who had served two Democratic presidents against a series of electronic communications that suggested he had shaded the truth in two letters and a meeting with Justice Department officials in 2013.
At that time, department officials were investigating whether Mr. Craig and his law firm had participated in a public relations campaign to help the Ukrainian government burnish its reputation. Public relations work would have prompted a requirement that Mr. Craig register as foreign agent.
“The question that you need to ask is not why this jury acquitted Mr. Craig, but why the Department of Justice brought this case against an innocent man in the first place,” Mr. Taylor said. “It’s a tragedy, it’s a disgrace and we are glad it is over.”
Mr. Craig, smiling broadly outside the courthouse, thanked the jurors, his family, his friends and his lawyers.
One juror, Michael G. Meyer, said that while some jurors were “very disturbed” by Mr. Craig’s conduct, “the law was presented to us in a very narrow fashion” that ruled out conviction.
Because the statute of limitations had run out to hold Mr. Craig accountable for any actions before October 2013, jurors were limited to considering whether he deceived federal officials during the three-month period that followed. Mr. Meyer said that four jurors switched their votes from guilty to not guilty after the panel sent a note to the judge to verify the limited time frame.
“Based on that very narrow thing, we couldn’t find anything he had done that warranted finding him guilty,” he said. Mr. Meyer added that Mr. Craig, in testifying in his own defense, came across as “very credible.”
Mr. Craig’s defense team insisted that prosecutors had concocted a charge out of a few minor omissions of facts that Mr. Craig was never under any obligation to reveal. “Mr. Craig is not the kind of person who would lie to a U.S. government agency, not after a 50-year career based on character and trust,” another of his lawyers, William Murphy, told the jurors.
Prosecutors said Mr. Craig gave in to hubris and self-interest, hiding the truth of his media contacts, not only from the Justice Department, but from his own firm’s general counsel. Fernando Campoamor-Sanchez, one of the prosecutors, described Mr. Craig’s final letter on the matter to the Justice Department as a “masterpiece” of lies and half-truths.
“If you read the letter,” he argued, “you will find contempt for the FARA unit.”
The FARA unit’s inquiry concerned a 2012 report that Mr. Craig and his law firm — Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom — produced for the Ukrainian government, then led by Viktor F. Yanukovych. Mr. Craig and his fellow lawyers were hired to review Ukraine’s prosecution of an opposition leader who had recently been sentenced to seven years in prison on corruption charges — a case that the United States and other Western nations had condemned as politically motivated. Mr. Yanukovych and his allies hoped the Skadden report would blunt criticism of the prosecution from the West.
The report, which earned the law firm $4.6 million, concluded that while the opposition leader’s rights had been violated at trial, her conviction was backed by evidence.
Prosecutors claimed that Mr. Craig concealed his role in helping Ukraine promote the report because registering as a foreign agent would have limited his prospects for further government service and damaged his reputation. They argued that he deliberately lied when he told Justice Department officials that he had responded to inquiries from reporters only to correct already published mischaracterizations of the report.
In fact, he had contacted Mr. Sanger, offering him an advance copy of the report and an interview about its findings two days before its publication.
But Mr. Craig’s lawyers described those complaints as niggling. They pointed out that federal officials kept no notes of a meeting during which Mr. Craig supposedly lied to them. They dismissed Rick Gates, one prosecution witness, as a “congenital liar” and described another key witness as a liar by trade.
And they questioned why, if the entire case rested on Mr. Craig’s interactions with Mr. Sanger, prosecutors never called the reporter to testify. The New York Times was expected to fight to quash any subpoena, as a matter of principle.
Mr. Meyer, the juror, said he was “deeply offended” by Mr. Craig’s indictment, given the breadth of other misconduct that was investigated by Mr. Mueller’s office. Although it did not initiate the case, it referred the allegations against Mr. Craig to other federal prosecutors.
“I could not understand why so many resources of the government were put into this when in fact actually the republic itself is at risk,” said Mr. Meyer, a specialist with a government consulting firm.
“This was a gnat,” he said. “How did this get to the front of the line?”
Rachel Shorey and Kenneth P. Vogel contributed reporting.
Advertisement
