Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — President Trump awarded the Medal of Freedom to the former N.B.A. great Jerry West on Thursday, the second time in two weeks that the president has honored a long-retired standout from a league whose current generation of stars is known for refusing to visit his White House.
Mr. Trump called the former Los Angeles Lakers star “a legend” who made “plays that will be remembered for forever — I know many of them.”
Known by the nickname “The Logo” — a photograph of him was used a model for the N.B.A.’s silhouette logo — Mr. West was named an all-star in each of his 14 seasons, all with the Lakers, and was inducted in the Basketball Hall of Fame in 1980. He won one championship as a player and eight more as a basketball executive.
The Oval Office ceremony took place only two weeks after the president awarded the medal to the former Boston Celtics star Bob Cousy, a 13-time N.B.A. all-star during the 1950s and 1960s who is worshiped as one of Boston’s greatest sports heroes. As Mr. Trump noted on Thursday, Mr. West and Mr. Cousy also played against each other.
But the awards for two white stars of a bygone — and far less racially diverse — basketball era are notable in light of Mr. Trump’s hostile relations with some of today’s black N.B.A. stars. Two years ago, the president withdrew his traditional White House invitation to a professional league’s championship team, in this case the N.B.A.’s Golden State Warriors, after the team’s best player, Stephen Curry, said that he would not attend such an event.
No championship N.B.A. team has made the customary trip to the White House since Mr. Trump became president, and after Golden State won the championship last year, the team came to Washington to visit with former President Barack Obama instead.
Mr. Trump has also lashed out at black N.F.L. stars, telling a crowd in 2017 that any player who kneels during the national anthem should be called a “son of a bitch” and fired. The kneeling movement has largely consisted of black players protesting social injustice and police brutality, and was pioneered by the former San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick, who Mr. Trump said in 2017 should have been suspended while he was still playing.
Mr. Trump has honored black athletes with the Medal of Freedom. In May, he presented one to the golf legend Tiger Woods, who is also a longtime friend, supporter and sometimes golfing partner of the president’s. And in November, one of the recipients was the former Minnesota Vikings defensive tackle Alan Page, who went on to serve as a justice on the Minnesota Supreme Court.
Playing in the turbulent 1960s, Mr. West’s Lakers frequently competed against, and lost to, the Celtics in the N.B.A. finals. The Celtics were led by Bill Russell, a fellow member of the Hall of Fame and a civil rights icon. Mr. Russell, who is black, attended the March on Washington in 1963, and had a notoriously stormy relationship with the mostly white Celtics fans, which spilled over onto Mr. West.
In his 2011 autobiography “West by West,” Mr. West wrote that he “always sensed how difficult it was for Bill to play in a fiercely segregated city like Boston.” Despite being a star player of the hated Lakers, Mr. West writes that he was a fan favorite in Boston, acknowledging that “part of it was no doubt because I was white.”
In 2011, Mr. Russell received a Medal of Freedom from Mr. Obama. Mr. Cousy, his former teammate, told Mr. Trump when he received his award last month that he was “the most extraordinary president in my lifetime.”
Mr. West’s politics are more difficult to discern. He wrote in his biography in 2008 that he found “the possibility of America electing a black man president incredible,” and that he intended to vote for Mr. Obama even though it “did not sit well with many of the guys I play gin with at Bel-Air Country Club.”
But on Thursday, he paid Mr. Trump one major compliment: “We read on our phone President Trump’s instantaneous tweets,” he said. “Pretty good, by the way.”
The Medal of Freedom was established by President John F. Kennedy in 1963, and is awarded at a president’s discretion to honor civilians who have made important political, artistic, scientific and other contributions to American society.
Michael Crowley reported from Washington, and Kevin Draper from New York.
Advertisement
