Advertisement
Supported by
Speaking with reporters aboard Air Force One as he headed to California for fund-raisers, the president identified five current or former members of his administration, including a couple of longtime generals and a hostage negotiator whom he has grown fond of.
The candidates he cited included Robert C. O’Brien, the special presidential envoy for hostage affairs who has brokered the release of high-profile detainees around the world, and Maj. Gen. Ricky L. Waddell, the principal military adviser to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and a former deputy national security adviser to Mr. Trump.
The president also listed Lisa E. Gordon-Hagerty, the under secretary of energy for nuclear security; Fred Fleitz, a former chief of staff to Mr. Bolton at the National Security Council; and Lt. Gen. Keith Kellogg, a retired officer who has advised Mr. Trump since the 2016 campaign and now serves as the national security adviser to Vice President Mike Pence.
In naming the five, Mr. Trump seemed to be ruling out several others who had been considered or proposed to him, including two top aides to Mr. Pompeo — Stephen E. Biegun, the special envoy for North Korea, and Brian H. Hook, the special envoy for Iran. Another who had been mentioned but was not included on the president’s list was Richard Grenell, the ambassador to Germany and a conservative firebrand.
But with Mr. Trump, a list of finalists is sometimes only a starting point, and he has been known to consider other candidates as names are floated to him or he happens to spot potential advisers on television. Some on the list he provided on Tuesday may be on there only to stroke egos or throw off those trying to divine his thinking.
A slew of other national security aides have left with Mr. Bolton or are expected to in the coming days and weeks, presenting a challenge to a president who is in the middle of a trade war with China and looking at a possible shooting war with Iran.
Follow Peter Baker on Twitter: @peterbakernyt.
Advertisement
