Advertisement
Supported by
The former intelligence contractor, who disclosed surveillance secrets in 2013, failed to submit his book for prepublication review.
He recounts his life up to the disclosures, including how he came to be alarmed by the growth of the security agency’s surveillance capabilities — such as its then-secret systematic collection of logs of Americans’ domestic phone calls — and how he copied the documents and provided them to reporters.
In the lawsuit, the Justice Department complained that by publishing the book, Mr. Snowden violated his legal obligation to let censors at the C.I.A. and the N.S.A. vet the manuscript first, and so he had to forfeit any profits. As a condition of receiving access to classified information, Mr. Snowden had signed nondisclosure agreements promising to submit to the review system any future writings related to his work for the agencies.
“Intelligence information should protect our nation, not provide personal profit,” G. Zachary Terwilliger, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia, where the department filed the case, said in a statement. “This lawsuit will ensure that Edward Snowden receives no monetary benefits from breaching the trust placed in him.”
Mr. Snowden hoped the lawsuit would attract more attention to the book, which aimed “to continue a global conversation about mass surveillance and free societies that his actions helped inspire,” an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer who represents him, Ben Wizner, said in a statement. 
Mr. Wizner also said that the book contained no classified information that the news media had not previously published.
“Had Mr. Snowden believed that the government would review his book in good faith, he would have submitted it for review,” Mr. Wizner said. “But the government continues to insist that facts that are known and discussed throughout the world are still somehow classified.”
In the lawsuit, the Justice Department also complained that Mr. Snowden had been paid for giving speeches without submitting his planned remarks for prepublication review, and said he should be ordered to turn over those profits as well. 
The lawsuit also named Mr. Snowden’s publisher, Macmillan, as a defendant, but said it was seeking only to prevent the company from paying royalties to Mr. Snowden that should now instead be turned over to the federal government. 
Mr. Snowden has been hailed as a whistle-blower by privacy and civil liberties advocates, while denounced as a traitor by national security officials. His disclosures prompted reforms. 
Officials and contractors who seek security clearances routinely agree to submit writings that relate to their work for prepublication review. The censorship system traces back to limits imposed on a handful of C.I.A. officials in the 1950s and has since ratcheted up to cover many more people and agencies.
Advertisement
