The duration of the call and the nature of the conversation about trade are unclear.
This seems, in the abstract, like it’s not a big deal. Trump called Putin and they talked about wildfires. Who cares.
“Trump’s interaction with the foreign leader included a 'promise’ that was regarded as so troubling that it prompted an official in the U.S. intelligence community to file a formal whistleblower complaint with the inspector general for the intelligence community,” The Post’s Greg Miller, Ellen Nakashima and Shane Harris reported Wednesday.
It’s not known which foreign leader was involved in the alleged conversation, but, then, we also may not know all of the leaders with whom Trump has spoken. We know about the Putin call because the Russians reported it. Who knows if there have been other calls with other leaders who have been less scrupulous — or less calculating — about revealing those chats?
In past administrations, there was a system for informing the public about conversations between the president and foreign leaders. After such conversations, the White House would publish a “readout,” a summary, sometimes detailed, of what was discussed between the two parties. The idea is a simple one: The American public should know what the president is doing. Those readouts had the additional side benefit of putting on the record what conversations the president was involved in and what he said, just in case there might someday be a question about whether a conversation occurred or a claim about an assertion made by the president.
The Trump White House has all but stopped providing readouts. During his first 1½ years in office, the White House was pretty good about reporting on Trump’s conversations with international leaders, though the length of those readouts dropped over time. The readouts on Trump’s in-person meetings with foreign leaders averaged 170 words in the first full six months of his presidency, for example, but only 100 words by the time the White House stopped publishing them in the summer of 2018.
(The circles below are scaled to the number of words published.)
Since then, there have been a few sporadic readouts published by the White House, but rarely.
Those readouts used to include other things, too, like meetings with congressional leaders and events focused on Trump’s legislative agenda. Readouts more specific to the concerns of policymaking have also gone out the window.
This is a function of Trump specifically. Vice President Pence’s team continues to produce readouts of his international interactions. What’s more, those readouts tend to be longer now than they were at the beginning of Trump’s administration.
Even the first lady’s interactions with international figures and organizations still get readouts — and lengthy ones. She doesn’t have many such meetings, but her team appears to be assiduous about producing readouts.
But that’s in a vacuum. We now have a case in which the details of Trump’s interactions with a foreign leader may be of enormous importance — and we’re in a position of not even knowing which leaders may have been involved.
Which, it seems, is exactly how the White House likes it.
Free daily updates delivered just for you
Free daily updates delivered just for you
