“Joe said that Medicare-for-all would cost over $30 trillion. That’s right, Joe. Status quo over 10 years will be $50 trillion.” 
Sanders made this comment after former vice president Joe Biden criticized the senator’s Medicare-for-all plan for potentially adding “$30 trillion, $3.4 trillion a year” to the federal budget. In his response, Sanders favorably compared that $30 trillion to what he called the “status quo” for health-care spending — $50 trillion. He added: “Every study done shows that Medicare-for-all is the most cost-effective approach to providing health care to every man, woman and child in this country.”
Waldman told the Fact Checker he has not read academic studies that looked closely at the impact of a Medicare-for-all plan on national health expenditures. All but one of five major studies, from the left to the right, predict the Sanders plan would increase health spending, not reduce it.
During our reporting for this fact check, a spokesman for the Sanders campaign said it was not endorsing Waldman’s analysis but was simply supplying a source for the $50 trillion figure that Sanders cited in the heat of the debate. But he declined repeated queries to explain the point Sanders was making with his comparison.
We will try not to get too much in the weeds, but this debate involves some big, confusing numbers.
Note that the $50 trillion and the $30 trillion involve different 10-year time frames and thus are not directly comparable.
Roughly speaking, there are two parts of the $50 trillion in national health expenditures that would be affected by a Medicare-for-all plan: $17 trillion in current government spending on Medicare, Medicaid, Obamacare and the like, and $26 trillion in spending by households, employers and states. (Another $7 trillion would not be affected.) Medicare-for-all would essentially take over the state, employer and household spending, so that’s the key variable.
Using the same time frame (2022 to 2031) so we can compare apples to apples, the “status quo” for health expenditures in the 10-year period covered by the Mercatus paper would be $59.7 trillion. Under the Mercatus range of estimates, total health expenditures under Medicare-for-all would be $57.6 trillion to $63.8 trillion over 10 years. On average, that’s slightly higher than under the current path.
“Bottom line is that it is incorrect to say that the plan is cheaper than current law, even on a national basis,” Blahous said. “Most of the range of possible outcomes would have total NHE increasing under Medicare-for-all. The increase occurs primarily because of the increase in the numbers of those covered as well as in the generosity of coverage, both of which would spur additional demand and, other things being equal, additional spending.”
“The increase in federal spending is so large because the federal government would absorb a substantial amount of current spending by state and local governments, employers, and households,” the report said. “In addition, federal spending would be needed for newly covered individuals, expanded benefits and the elimination of cost sharing for those insured under current law, and the new long-term support and services program.”
Thorpe, a skeptic of the Sanders plan, said he was surprised when Sanders made the comparison during the debate. The two figures are “apples and oranges and not comparable,” he said.
“Medicare-for-all would increase the dollars paid by the federal government, if private premiums are largely eliminated and new taxes are established to fund a national single-payer system,” Liu said. “How this impacts national health expenditures depends on a variety of assumptions. In our RAND report, we projected a 1.8 percent increase in national health expenditures if Medicare-for-All was implemented in 2019.”
“Bernie is overstating things,” Friedman said. “Even with optimistic assumptions about savings realized and a slowdown in growth to Canadian or European growth rates and an actuarial value of 87 percent (not the 96 percent in his program), spending would not decline by $20 trillion, or 40 percent. I am perfectly comfortable in saying that there will be financial savings, savings over-and-above the improvements in health that would come with greater access and improvements in financial stability with universal quality insurance. The benefits of Medicare-for-all are substantial enough that there really is no need to exaggerate.”
Sanders implied during the debate that his Medicare-for-all plan would reduce health-care spending compared to the “status quo” of $50 trillion over 10 years. His use of the “more than $30 trillion” figure might have led listeners to assume he was comparing the two figures. Certainly that’s how the authors of these studies interpreted these comments.
That might have been a logical assumption. During the debate, his staff shared, as the source of the $50 trillion figure, a pair of Washington Post opinion columns that made a similar comparison. But a spokesman has since said that the campaign was not endorsing the analysis in those columns. Instead, he says Sanders was simply pointing to a government estimate for health expenditures over a 10-year period.
Since the spokesman declined to explain why Sanders made the comparison, we are left with a conundrum. It certainly sounded as if he was saying his plan would reduce health-care spending from $50 trillion over 10 years to $30 trillion, even though most studies predict spending will increase. The Washington Post columns originally cited as a source also framed the issue that way.
On balance, as uttered during the debate, the statement is mostly false. Four of the five key studies on the impact of the Sanders plan estimate that national health expenditures will rise over 10 years, while the author of the fifth predicts a decline but says Sanders’s statement is exaggerated.
