Advertisement
Supported by
The latest poll numbers from The Des Moines Register and CNN were very good for Elizabeth Warren as she and Joseph R. Biden Jr. broke away from the rest of the Democratic pack. 
The poll is the latest evidence of Ms. Warren’s political rise in the 2020 race. Alone among the 2020 candidates, her campaign stops have become bona fide events, with 20,000 people attending a speech in Manhattan this week and 2,000 turning out in Iowa City on Thursday night.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont placed third with 11 percent, the second consecutive poll from The Register in which his campaign has seen precipitous decreases in support. Mr. Sanders, who placed in a statistical tie with Hillary Clinton in the state’s 2016 contest, had 25 percent support in the paper’s March poll and 16 percent support in June. 
Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., placed fourth in The Register’s poll, with 9 percent. He had 14 percent in The Register’s June poll and has fallen in other surveys of the state since then before launching a television advertising campaign here after Labor Day.
The gains by Ms. Warren come largely at the expense of Mr. Sanders. His polling drop-off comes as his campaign has reordered staff in early nominating states in an effort to reboot his campaign. 
Senator Kamala Harris of California was fifth overall with 6 percent support. Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota each had 3 percent support. Four candidates were the first choice of 2 percent of likely Iowa caucusgoers. 
The dynamics are far from set: Just one in five likely Democratic caucusgoers said their minds were made up, and 63 percent said they could still be persuaded to support a different candidate.
The poll surveyed 602 likely Democratic caucusgoers by telephone Sept. 14-18, and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.
It was released after 17 Democratic presidential candidates appeared Saturday at the Polk County Steak Fry, an annual political event that drew 12,000 activists and voters to a Des Moines park for several hours of political speeches, campaign singalongs and freshly grilled meats.
The poll, like the Steak Fry event, illustrated the increasingly condensed nature of the 2020 Democratic presidential contest. The poll found just five candidates registering more than 3 percent support, while those who braved the drizzling conditions and threat of thunderstorms congregated around the candidates who emerged hours later atop the polls.
The event’s largest applause came for Ms. Warren, who repeated a forceful call for President Trump’s impeachment, and Mr. Buttigieg, who was followed by a yellow-clad cadre of highly enthusiastic supporters.
For some, the event may mark one of their last major appearances in the state. Mr. Booker sent out a plea to donors today saying that unless he raises $1.7 million over the next 10 days, he will be unable to remain in the race. He’s not alone in being in danger of running out of cash.
Advertisement
