Advertisement
Supported by
President Trump mentioned an American cybersecurity firm that is at the center of a conspiracy theory in a call with Ukraine’s president.
WASHINGTON — President Trump in July asked the president of Ukraine to “do us a favor” by looking into an American cybersecurity firm, CrowdStrike, and the location of a Democratic National Committee server that Mr. Trump said was believed to be in Ukraine’s possession.
Here is what we know about CrowdStrike.
In asking Mr. Zelensky for a “favor” in the July 25 call, Mr. Trump appeared to be referencing an unfounded conspiracy theory that Ukrainians, not Russians, were behind the D.N.C. hacking, and the Ukrainians framed the Russian government to make it look like that country was working with Mr. Trump’s presidential campaign. Rudolph W. Giuliani, Mr. Trump’s personal attorney, has been among those pushing this theory. 
It is true that the servers themselves were not physically examined by the F.B.I., but CrowdStrike, which has a former senior F.B.I. official on its executive team, gave forensic evidence to federal investigators, including exact replicas of the data contained on the servers.
“We provided all forensic evidence and analysis to the F.B.I.,” a CrowdStrike spokeswoman, Ilina Cashiola, said Wednesday in an emailed statement. “As we’ve stated before, we stand by our findings and conclusions that have been fully supported by the U.S. intelligence community.”
Mr. Zelensky was the only one to use the word “investigation” during the call, but in each of the six times he used the word, it was not clear what inquiries he is referencing. At one point, Mr. Zelensky referred to an unnamed company during the call, but it was not clear whether he was speaking of CrowdStrike or the gas company Hunter Biden sat on the board of, Burisma Holdings.
[Trump, Biden and Ukraine: Sorting Out the Accusations]
Mr. Giuliani has acknowledged discussing some of the theories related to Ukraine and the D.N.C. hacking with Mr. Trump, and he has said that the president seemed interested in getting to the bottom of it.
Kenneth P. Vogel and David E. Sanger contributed reporting from Washington, and Nicole Perlroth in San Francisco. 
Advertisement
