Advertisement
Supported by
The president and the Democrats may be girding for a constitutional clash, but their campaigns are working to capitalize on the moment with fund-raising appeals.
The breathless text message from President Trump and his campaign landed soon after Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced a formal impeachment inquiry: “I need you on my Impeachment Defense Team.”
In a flurry of tweets, text messages and emails, Mr. Trump has pressed his millions of supporters to donate to protect his hold on the presidency. 
One email from Mr. Trump’s campaign and the Republican National Committee arrived with the paper clip symbol and the words “Call Transcript” in the subject line, suggesting there was an attachment. There was no attachment. Instead, Mr. Trump was seeking “charter members” for his “Official Impeachment Defense Task Force” against a Democratic “smear job.”
At least initially, most Democrats were less explicit than Mr. Trump in seeking to monetize the impeachment push, with several emailing their lists of supporters to first ask them to sign impeachment petitions, rather than asking directly for donations.
But money still flowed: The online ticker for ActBlue, the company that processes most online Democratic donations, showed that Tuesday was one of the bigger fund-raising days in recent months that was not linked to a Democratic debate or a monthly deadline. The site showed $4.6 million in donations on Tuesday, after $4.2 million on Monday.
The D.N.C. also said that Tuesday was its best fund-raising day of the month. (Notably, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, the campaign arm for House Democrats, has so far not included impeachment in its fund-raising solicitations.)
“Disgusting,” read one email subject line. “About Ukraine,” said another.
“Donald Trump asked a foreign leader eight times to investigate my family,” one appeal read. “But I’m only going to ask you once: Please, I need you with me at this critical moment. Chip in to my campaign tonight.”
A Biden adviser said the campaign had tripled its daily online fund-raising average on Saturday, though the adviser didn’t respond Wednesday morning when asked whether that pace had continued.
The campaign also sent a fund-raising email Tuesday evening suggesting that Mr. Biden’s sliding poll numbers were a bigger problem than Mr. Trump’s foreign dealings.
“Look, here’s the bad news: Trump is using the Oval Office to pressure a foreign power into interfering in the 2020 election,” the email said. “And it gets even worse: A new poll has us down in Iowa, a key first state in this Primary race.”
Ms. Harris was also running an ad on Facebook targeting Iowa voters, in which she called for impeachment proceedings in a video.
“The impeachment inquiry must move forward with the efficiency and seriousness this crisis demands,” Ms. Warren says in an ad that began running on Tuesday. “The House needs to vote on articles of impeachment — and when it comes to the Senate, I will do what the Constitution requires. Sign up now if you’re with me.” 
Ms. Warren’s campaign has been spending modestly on impeachment-related Facebook ads for months, according to Bully Pulpit Interactive, a Democratic digital communications firm. From late April to mid-September, her campaign spent an estimated $133,000 on Facebook ads about impeachment, according to the firm. But that represented only about 8 percent of her overall spending on Facebook during that period.
Katie Glueck, Thomas Kaplan and Rachel Shorey contributed reporting.
Advertisement
