Advertisement
Supported by
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. on Tuesday forcefully rejected criticism that the Supreme Court’s work had been warped by partisanship.
“We don’t go about our work in a political manner,” he told an audience of some 2,000 people at the Temple Emanu-El’s Streicker Center in Manhattan.
“We probably do a better job criticizing ourselves in our dissents than anybody else could,” he said.
But he added that the outside criticism did not affect the court’s independence. “A lot of the criticism is based on a misperception,” he said.
People often note that the court is made up of five Republican appointees and four Democratic ones, he said, and they expect predictable 5-to-4 decisions along those lines.
“Last year,” he said, “we had 19 5-to-4 decisions, and seven of them were divided with the five justices appointed by Republican presidents in the majority and the four justices appointed by Democratic presidents in dissent.”
“That shouldn’t come as a surprise because we don’t go about our work in a political manner,” he said.
The last term’s two biggest decisions, on partisan gerrymandering and adding a question on citizenship to the census, both featured controlling opinions written by the chief justice, who was appointed by President George W. Bush. Both were closely divided. In the gerrymandering case, Chief Justice Roberts voted with the other Republican appointees. In the key part of the census decision, he voted with the four Democratic appointees.
Chief Justice Roberts noted that Mr. Trump’s two appointees, Justices Neil M. Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh, disagreed at a striking rate.
“The point is that when you live in a politically polarized environment, people tend to see everything in those terms,” he said. “That’s not how we at the court function, and the results in our cases do not suggest otherwise.”
The chief justice said his colleagues came from diverse professional backgrounds, having worked as prosecutors, in a government agency, as a Senate aide and as a trial judge.
“And, of course, Justice Ginsburg brings her experience as a rock star,” he said.
Asked if he could best Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg at push-ups, he said that would not be a fair fight.
“She has so much less to push up,” he said. “I can comfortably say that I can bench press her weight and she can’t bench press mine.”
Asked for his favorite classic rock band, Chief Justice Roberts, 64, picked the Byrds, saying he had seen them not long ago. “I’ve never been in a room with more 65-year-old men with ponytails,” he said.
He also endorsed the decision to award the Nobel Prize in Literature to Bob Dylan, an observation that was greeted by applause.
Rabbi Lipson asked if being a practicing Roman Catholic affected Chief Justice Roberts’s decisions.
The chief justice said no. “When I am researching a case, I look to the Constitution,” he said. “I look to the United States Code. I look to the precedents. I don’t look to the Bible. I think that’s very important. My religion doesn’t affect my decisions.”
He added that his faith informed other aspects of his life. “I am taught to see the image and likeness of God in every person and that, I think, does cause you to look at the people — whether they are a criminal defendant in a particular case or whatever party they are — in a particular way,” he said. “But I don’t believe it affects how I decide cases.”
Chief Justice Roberts said he was not always happy with the results the law requires. “We uphold a lot of things that we don’t like,” he said, giving the example of flag burning, which he said was “a horrible thing” and was once banned in many states.
“But when that case came to the court those laws were quite comfortably — I think it was 8 to 1 or something like that — struck down as violating the First Amendment under our Constitution. People don’t necessarily feel the same way about the flag that I do, and they are entitled to express their views in the harmless way of burning the flag. So I agree with that decision, but that doesn’t mean I agree with the conduct that’s involved.”
Chief Justice Roberts added that people should not expect too much of the Supreme Court. “The court’s job is to decide legal disputes under the Constitution and laws, not to cure the ills of society,” he said. “To the extent people are looking to the court they ought to be looking elsewhere.”
One of the harder parts of his job, he said, was attending State of the Union addresses, where the justices have to take pains to applaud only very occasionally. “It’s not our job to express support for particular policy initiatives,” he said. “So we do sit there like mannequins.”
He said the justices were not alone. “The Joint Chiefs of Staff are in the same position,” he said. “They’re sitting there like much better dressed mannequins.”
Advertisement
