Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — At the end of August, when two top intelligence officials asked a Justice Department lawyer whether a whistle-blower’s complaint should be forwarded to Congress, they were told no, Attorney General William P. Barr and his department could handle the criminal referral against the president of the United States.
After congressional intelligence committees examined the full whistle-blower complaint on Wednesday afternoon, the House Intelligence Committee chairman, Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, said, “The idea that the Department of Justice would have intervened to prevent it from getting to Congress throws the leadership of the department into further ill repute.”
The rough transcript showed that Mr. Trump believes he has that man. In a single sentence during the call with Ukraine’s leader, Mr. Trump said that he would have Rudolph W. Giuliani, his personal lawyer, and Mr. Barr reach out to help further an investigation of Mr. Biden and his younger son, Hunter Biden, who had served on the board of a Ukrainian corporation.
“I will have Mr. Giuliani give you a call, and I am also going to have Attorney General Barr call, and we will get to the bottom of it,” Mr. Trump said.
A Justice Department official said that Mr. Barr had no knowledge of the call until the director of national intelligence and the intelligence community’s inspector general sent the department the whistle-blower’s criminal referral late last month, and that Mr. Trump has not spoken with the attorney general “about having Ukraine investigate anything relating to former Vice President Biden or his son.”
Mr. Trump has not asked Mr. Barr to contact Ukraine for any reason, Mr. Barr has not communicated with Ukraine on any topic, and Mr. Barr has not spoken with Mr. Giuliani about the president’s phone call “or anything relating to Ukraine,” a Justice Department spokeswoman, Kerri Kupec, said in a statement.
But the department’s involvement in the case has been overwhelmingly positive for Mr. Trump. Not only did the department advise the acting director of national intelligence, Joseph Maguire, to keep the whistle-blower complaint from Congress, it unequivocally ruled out the possibility of criminal conduct on the part of the president.
That outcome was in keeping with other determinations that have come out of the Justice Department regarding Mr. Trump. Time and again, department lawyers have said the president had not engaged in criminal or unethical behavior, whether it was potentially obstructing the investigation of the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, or criminally conspiring with Moscow as Russian intelligence agents tried to sway the 2016 election to Mr. Trump.
Mr. Barr’s defenders say he is being judged unfairly. He was under no obligation to release Mr. Mueller’s report, which even in redacted form contained hundreds of pages of damning information about a person who was not charged with a crime.
In the case of the Ukraine call, a criminal charge against the president was a far higher legal bar than the Constitution’s “high crimes and misdemeanors” bar for impeachment, which could mean pretty much whatever Congress wants it to mean.
But Mr. Barr is also closely overseeing a review of the intelligence community’s decision to start a counterintelligence investigation into the Trump campaign during the 2016 election, which is being led by John Durham, the United States attorney in Connecticut. As part of that review, Mr. Durham is exploring what role, if any, a number of countries including Ukraine played in the investigation of the Trump campaign.
“While the attorney general has yet to contact Ukraine in connection with this investigation, certain Ukrainians who are not members of the government have volunteered information to Mr. Durham, which he is evaluating,” Ms. Kupec said.
In the case of the Ukraine call, the Justice Department’s Office of Legal Council determined early this month that the whistle-blower complaint should not be shared with Congress’s intelligence committees because it did not flag intelligence-related activities. Rather, it should be referred to the Justice Department as a possible violation of campaign finance law.
Mr. Barr was not involved in the Justice Department’s review, which was overseen by the deputy attorney general, Jeffrey A. Rosen. It was led by the department’s criminal division and conducted by career prosecutors from the division’s public integrity section and the national security division.
Last week, the criminal division concluded that there were no legal grounds for a criminal investigation in to Mr. Trump’s behavior.
“All relevant components of the department agreed with this legal conclusion, and the department has concluded the matter,” Ms. Kupec said.
In coming to that conclusion, the Justice Department said the whistle-blower did not have firsthand knowledge of the call, and the intelligence community’s inspector general had said the whistle-blower could be politically biased. But senior department officials said their determination was based on the reconstructed transcript, not those other factors.
They did not interview the participants on the call, which they are not obliged to do unless they open a criminal investigation. And they did not consider a Justice Department opinion that a sitting president cannot be indicted.
“The Justice Department has not always taken the most aggressive reading of these kinds of campaign finance restrictions,” said Stephen I. Vladeck, a law professor at the University of Texas at Austin. “But that ought not cloud the obvious point that what the president did was wrong.”
Advertisement
