House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) and Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) on Sunday urged President Trump to endorse House-passed gun measures and pledged to join him for a “historic signing ceremony at the Rose Garden” if the legislation is passed.
The Democrats’ push for action comes amid public outrage over mass shootings across the country, including rampages last month in Dayton, Ohio, and El Paso that left 31 people dead.
“This morning, we made it clear to the president that any proposal he endorses that does not include the House-passed universal background checks legislation will not get the job done, as dangerous loopholes will still exist and people who shouldn’t have guns will still have access,” Pelosi and Schumer said in their statement.
“We know that to save as many lives as possible, the Senate must pass this bill and the President must sign it,” they added. “We even promised the President that if he endorses this legislation and gets Senator McConnell to act on what the House has passed, we would both join him for a historic signing ceremony at the Rose Garden.”
White House spokesman Judd Deere said that Sunday morning’s phone conversation was “cordial” and that it centered on Pelosi and Schumer’s interest in action on H.R. 8, the expanded background checks bill passed by the House.
Trump, Deere said, “made no commitments” on the measure “but instead indicated his interest in working to find a bipartisan legislative solution on appropriate responses to the issue of mass gun violence.”
“The president reiterated his commitment for his administration to continue work on these issues,” Deere said in a statement.
According to an official familiar with the negotiations, who was not authorized to speak publicly, Trump told Pelosi and Schumer he was having a “big meeting” Monday on the issue and would be doing something “this week.”
In an interview on “Fox News Sunday” hours earlier, White House counselor Kellyanne Conway said “there are a number of pieces of legislation the president is considering” on guns, although she did not offer any specifics.
In an exchange with reporters at the Capitol last week, McConnell accused Schumer of a “stunt” after the Democrat called on the Senate to take up the gun bill, which McConnell noted “the president already said he is going to veto.”
“My members know the very simple fact that to make a law you have to have a presidential signature. . . . And so, we do, in fact, await word from the White House about what the president is willing to sign,” McConnell said.
In their statement, Pelosi and Schumer touted the House-passed gun measures as “bipartisan, commonsense legislation to expand background checks, which is supported by more than 90 percent of the American people.”
“Yet, for 200 days, Senator McConnell has refused to give these bipartisan bills a vote on the Senate Floor, again and again putting his own political survival before the survival of our children. . . . We will not stop until these bills are passed and our children’s lives are safe,” they said.
 Seung Min Kim, Mike DeBonis and Josh Dawsey contributed to this report. 
