The House Oversight and Reform Committee on Monday sought documents from Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao as it investigates what it calls “troubling questions” into whether the Trump appointee misused her position for personal and family benefit.
The Department of Transportation pushed back on claims of ethics violations Monday, saying in a statement to The Washington Post that Chao has not been involved with the family’s shipping business for more than four decades. The DOT confirmed it received the committee’s letter and said it looks forward to responding.
“Media attacks targeting the Secretary’s family are stale and only attempt to undermine her long career of public service,” the department wrote.
An article in Politico last year highlighted dozens of media interviews in which Chao stood beside her father — sometimes in conjunction with flags for the DOT or Kentucky, where McConnell serves. Experts told Politico the interviews could be interpreted as promoting Chao’s father’s book or signaling the Chaos’ valuable U.S. connections in China.
“There is nothing inappropriate with a Cabinet member appearing with her father or other family members,” a DOT spokesperson responded at the time. “The secretary’s appearances are intended to share an inspirational story about immigrants from a minority community who have become successful in our country.”
But others in the government have questioned Chao’s mixing of family and official business since she became head of the DOT in 2017.
“This was alarmingly inappropriate,” David Rank, a former State Department staffer, said of the China visit canceled over Chao’s attempts to involve relatives, according to The Times.
The Oversight and Reform Committee’s letter also probes recent moves by the DOT to cut millions from programs meant to help the U.S. shipping industry, saying the Department’s actions “may threaten national security” by making the country potentially more dependent on foreign-flagged ships during war or emergencies. The Department’s proposals included ultimately rejected cuts to the Maritime Security Program, which helps ensure the military can access American-flagged ships in times of need.
Removing domestic maritime funding could have helped Foremost Group because the company owns foreign-flagged ships, the letter says.
Amid scrutiny of the Vulcan shares, a June 13 DOT letter to the Office of Government Ethics described “inadvertent misstatements of fact” in Chao’s earlier financial disclosures and an ethics agreement. The Oversight Committee says it is examining these misstatements as well as Chao’s compliance with ethics and disclosure requirements.
The committee’s letter makes 18 requests for documents and information, ranging from any communications about Foremost involving DOT employees to unredacted copies of documents released to The Times under a Freedom of Information Act request.
It asks that Chao fulfill the requests by Sept. 30.
The investigation could lead to higher penalties for inaccurate financial statements, new disclosure requirements or other changes in the law, the letter signed by Reps. Elijah E. Cummings (D-Md.) and Raja Krishnamoorthi (D-Ill) states.
The DOT disputed the allegations against Chao on many fronts in its statement to The Post on Monday. It suggested that the Chao family’s shipping company falls outside the Department’s purview, saying the DOT’s Maritime Administration is “not a major regulator of the maritime industry” and deals mostly with domestic shipping. Foremost Group does not operate U.S.-flagged vessels and is “not involved in the domestic U.S. merchant marine shipping business,” the DOT said.
The department countered criticism of its past proposed cuts to domestic shipping programs by saying the Maritime Administration’s operating budget is larger than ever. The department requested the full $300 million authorized for the Maritime Security Program for this year and is working to replace training ships for marine academies, it said.
The department added that its ethics officials do not see Chao’s stock in Vulcan Materials a conflict of interest and said the secretary has been recused from issues involving the company. Chao sold her stocks anyway due to a “commitment to going above and beyond what is required,” DOT said.
The DOT attributed errors in Chao’s ethics disclosures to a “misunderstanding.”
The Oversight and Reform Committee did not immediately respond Monday to questions.
Read more:
Tracking how many key positions Trump has filled so far
McConnell dismisses report that his wife, Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao, steered funds to Kentucky
