By late September 2018, the Department of Justice had weathered months of unprecedented criticism from the president of the United States. Donald Trump had disparaged the FBI as having gone soft on his 2016 election opponent, Hillary Clinton, and of orchestrating a “witch hunt” against him personally.
A special counsel working for Justice had already obtained indictments against a number of people tied to Trump’s campaign, and the ongoing probe was an incessant target of Trump’s ire. He already had fired the director of the FBI, James B. Comey, and would, a little over a month later, oust his attorney general, Jeff Sessions — himself a frequent target of Trump’s tweets.
It was a moment when tensions between the world of politics and the ideally-but-imperfectly apolitical world of federal investigators were near a peak. And at that very moment, out of the blue, the FBI was given a new mandate: resolve one of the most contentious issues in American politics.
Kavanaugh himself appeared before the committee after Ford. In introducing the questioning, Sen. Charles E. Grassley (R-Iowa), the committee chairman, noted that his panel had sought evidence from Ramirez’s attorneys eight times and said her attorneys didn’t “make her available” for interview. Asked about her allegations, Kavanaugh replied that they, along with those of Ford and a third accuser named Julie Swetnick, were wrong — and that he said so “emphatically.”
The dual Ford-Kavanaugh hearings didn’t resolve the nomination vote itself. Before the Senate Judiciary Committee advanced Kavanaugh to the full Senate for a vote, Sens. Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.) and Christopher A. Coons (D-Del.) reached an unusual (though not unprecedented) agreement: The FBI should dig further into the allegations against Kavanaugh and present an assessment of the new claims before the Senate made up its mind. Flake himself had been a target of Trump’s, ultimately declining not to run for reelection in the then-upcoming midterm elections after losing the support of Republican voters in his state as the president singled him out for disparagement.
The stakes for the probe — and for Trump’s breathless defenses of Kavanaugh — were huge. The Republican leadership in the Senate had little choice but to agree to the new investigation, but that didn’t mean they had to like it. The bureau was given one week to interview possible witnesses to the accusations against Kavanaugh and to report back what it found.
Why the rush? One looming deadline was the 2018 midterm elections. Those elections could have made Kavanaugh’s nomination even more difficult, given the (unlikely) prospect that Democrats could gain seats in the Senate. Another problem was that it seemed possible that more accusations could arise if the process were any more prolonged. So one week and tight constraints were imposed on a bureau and a department that were already facing enormous pressure from the White House.
The FBI's probe didn't turn up anything new. Kavanaugh was confirmed, with Flake's and Collins's support, exactly one month before the midterm elections.
“At least seven people, including Ms. Ramirez’s mother, heard about the Yale incident long before Mr. Kavanaugh was a federal judge,” Robin Pogrebin and Kate Kelly reported. “Two of those people were classmates who learned of it just days after the party occurred, suggesting that it was discussed among students at the time.”
As they put it, “Mr. Kavanaugh said that if the incident Ms. Ramirez described had occurred, it would have been 'the talk of campus.' Our reporting suggests that it was."
He wasn’t interviewed.
The primary question, of course, is not what Kavanaugh did in college but what he said about his actions when speaking under oath to the Senate Judiciary Committee. The additional FBI probe was established to be able to evaluate that question, as Coons and Flake stated at the time, but the probe appears to have never been empowered to actually answer it.
There was almost certainly little appetite by Sessions to have ensured that the investigation press hard despite White House efforts to limit it, both because of his own tense relationship with Trump and because he was himself a conservative former member of the U.S. Senate who would certainly have voted to confirm Kavanaugh if he had never left that body. Sessions was fired right after the midterms.
During his committee testimony, Kavanaugh was unwavering in his dismissal of the claims.
“None of these allegations are true?” Sen. John Neely Kennedy (R-La.) asked then.
“Correct,” Kavanaugh replied.
“No doubt in your mind?” Kennedy said.
“Zero,” Kavanaugh said. “I’m 100 percent certain."
“Not even a scintilla?” Kennedy pressed.
“Not a scintilla; 100 percent certain, Senator,” Kavanaugh said.
“You swear to God?” Kennedy asked.
Kavanaugh agreed.
“I swear to God.”
