On the list of President Trump’s alleged political sins, wrongly crediting a GOP ally for getting him to declare a pre-hurricane federal emergency in North Carolina doesn’t rank particularly high.
But this is a remarkably transparent political gambit even for a president to whom so little is holy, coming as it does on the eve of a natural disaster that threatens the southeastern United States.
On Tuesday night, Trump credited Sen. Thom Tillis (N.C.) for his decision to declare a federal emergency in the state ahead of Hurricane Dorian’s arrival. “At the request of Senator Thom Tillis, I am getting the North Carolina Emergency Declaration completed and signed tonight,” Trump tweeted. “Hope you won’t need it!”
At the request of Senator Thom Tillis, I am getting the North Carolina Emergency Declaration completed and signed tonight. Hope you won’t need it!
And Tillis was clearly angling for some credit here, repeatedly tweeting about his talks with Trump about the federal emergency.
“Thank you, Mr. President!” he said.
Which, fine. Tillis can certainly play a role in that process, too — even if he doesn’t formally make the request. And there’s nothing wrong with letting people you work for know you’re engaged and talking to the president.
Whether someone is politicizing a natural disaster is difficult to pin down; one person’s politicization is another’s raising of an important issue. Republicans accuse Democrats of politicizing hurricanes by citing climate change, for example, when Democrats and climate scientists think that’s pretty important.
But even accounting for that subjectivity, Trump’s pre-hurricane gambits have been pretty obvious.
And before he was president, Trump previewed Hurricane Sandy in 2012 by arguing that President Barack Obama would use it to his advantage for his reelection bid.
“Hurricane is good luck for Obama again- he will buy the election by handing out billions of dollars,” Trump tweeted.
Hurricane is good luck for Obama again- he will buy the election by handing out billions of dollars.
Not only giving out money, but Obama will be seen today standing in water and rain like he is a real President --- don't fall for it.
Trump even used the occasion to extend the deadline for his offer of $5 million for Obama’s birth certificate.
“Because of the hurricane, I am extending my 5 million dollar offer for President Obama’s favorite charity until 12PM on Thursday,” Trump said.
Because of the hurricane, I am extending my 5 million dollar offer for President Obama's favorite charity until 12PM on Thursday.
It has become pretty clear what’s on Trump’s mind when a hurricane is about to hit.
