“In the end the Party would announce that two and two made five, and you would have to believe it. It was inevitable that they should make that claim sooner or later: the logic of their position demanded it. Not merely the validity of experience, but the very existence of external reality was tacitly denied by their philosophy. The heresy of heresies was common sense.” - George Orwell, 1984
The tweet below was incorrect.
In addition to Florida - South Carolina, North Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama, will most likely be hit (much) harder than anticipated. Looking like one of the largest hurricanes ever. Already category 5. BE CAREFUL! GOD BLESS EVERYONE!
During a briefing at Federal Emergency Management Agency headquarters a few hours after he tweeted, Trump nonetheless insisted that Alabama was, indeed, at risk.
Even that small possibility wasn’t indicated in NOAA’s projections on Sunday morning and, by Tuesday morning, it had passed.
Here, for example, is one early projection, showing that the path of the storm would likely hit northern Florida before curling up to the northeast — basically what happened. Some models, though, showed other paths, heading as far west as Texas or Louisiana or making landfall as far east as North Carolina.
That graphic displays possibilities and isn’t what officials act on. As the graphic itself indicates, it is superseded by updates from the National Hurricane Center (NHC) — the updates shown in the graphics above.
He paired the Thursday morning map with a refined explanation for why he was correct all along.
It seems likely that Trump’s FEMA comments were tailored to address his by-then-already-disproved tweet about Alabama. Maybe it wouldn’t be hit hard, but “Alabama could even be in for at least some very strong winds and something more than that" — a development that “just came up” at that point, according to Trump’s full FEMA statement. That is itself, of course, at odds with Trump’s claims that the important factor was modeling from days earlier. (The line-covered map is dated Aug. 28.)
All of this has been fairly well established by now. Trump’s tweet was dismissed as inaccurate by his own National Weather Service’s station in Alabama within a half-hour of his sending it out. Again, it was an important correction to make: Alabamians were incorrectly informed by the president that their state was at risk, and it’s the responsibility of those in positions of authority to quell such unwarranted concerns.
That refutation came four days ago — but here we are, still litigating it.
Denying even minor mistakes preserves the possibility that there might be a shred of accuracy in what he’s saying and, therefore, that he’s right and his opponents are wrong. We’ve seen multiple examples of Trump and his supporters dragging goal posts around to prove him right, from his claim that he saw Muslims in New Jersey on 9/11 to his assertions about Trump Tower being wiretapped to the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election. In each case, the initial claims evolved or eroded until they reached a point where Trump could be granted a willing suspension of disbelief by those interested in doing so. “What Trump really meant was” could be his presidency’s motto.
In this case, Trump has evolved his explanation from “Alabama will be hit harder than expected” to “modeling at one point included a possible risk to Alabama and also there might have been possible wind damage to the state at some point.” His supporters are active on social media sharing decontextualized maps of Dorian in which unidentified bars of color overlap however narrowly with the state, “proof” that Trump was “right,” because maybe at some point there might have been some threat to the state and, therefore, the fake news is wrong and biased and deserves nothing but the worst.
But the motivation for Spicer’s arguments isn’t funny. It is rooted in Trump’s insistence that his truth is the prevailing truth, however narrowly it has to be constrained. Objective facts, like the threat posed by Dorian, must be trimmed or expanded until they meet what Trump has claimed is correct.
Two and two equals five, unless you listen to the lamestream media.
“The Party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears. It was their final, most essential command.” - Orwell, 1984
