President Trump on Thursday suggested that NBC fire “Will & Grace” actress Debra Messing, who has apologized for a tweet in which she promoted an Alabama church sign that said “a black vote for Trump is mental illness.”
In morning tweets, Trump took aim at Messing for both that and a separate controversy stemming from her call for the Hollywood Reporter to publish names of people attending a Beverly Hills fundraiser for Trump later this month.
“Bad ‘actress’ Debra The Mess Messing is in hot water,” Trump wrote. “She wants to create a ‘Blacklist’ of Trump supporters, & is being accused of McCarthyism. Is also being accused of being a Racist because of the terrible things she said about blacks and mental illness.”
In tweets sent as Hurricane Dorian lashed the Carolinas, Trump pointed to ABC’s firing of Roseanne Barr last year from “a much higher rated show” for posting a racist tweet about Valerie Jarrett, a former adviser to President Barack Obama.
“Will Fake News NBC allow a McCarthy style Racist to continue? ABC fired Roseanne. Watch the double standard!” Trump wrote.
....said what she did, even being on a much higher rated show, she would have been thrown off television. Will Fake News NBC allow a McCarthy style Racist to continue? ABC fired Roseanne. Watch the double standard!
Messing did not immediately respond directly to Trump on Thursday.
But several hours later, she ribbed him on Twitter by posting a piece from New Yorker magazine with the headline: “Trump’s Wacky, Angry, and Extreme August.”
“I truly hope his family gets him the help he needs. Sad,” she added in her own words.
In a tweet Wednesday, Messing said she had apologized for her tweet in which she promoted the sign at a Birmingham, Ala., church that said “a black vote for Trump is mental illness.” In the original tweet, she wrote: “THANK YOU #Alabama.”
On Wednesday, Messing said, “I regret it. I shud have thought before recklessly suppprting.”
Her tweet responded to one by comedian Terrence K. Williams, a Trump supporter, who contended that Trump “would be called a racist if he called blacks mentally ill.”
Williams encouraged Twitter users to spread the hashtag #RacistDebraMessing.
Williams was involved in a separate controversy regarding Trump last month.
Trump retweeted a Williams tweet to his 64 million followers that suggested former president Bill Clinton might have been involved in the prison death of Jeffrey Epstein, the politically connected financier who had been facing multiple charges of sex trafficking involving underage girls.
Trump defended his promotion of that baseless conspiracy theory by saying he had retweeted a “very highly respected conservative pundit.”
