Hurricane Dorian seemed poised to slam directly into Florida as recently as last Thursday. Projections from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration showed a track for the storm passing north of the Bahamas and pointing straight into the middle of the state.
And certainly not to Alabama. The most that Alabama was included in the NOAA’s projections was late Friday, when the cone of possible directions briefly brushed against the most extreme southeastern part of the state. That cone, of course, doesn’t indicate that the hurricane would swell to a size greater than the state of Georgia; instead, it shows a range of possible places where Dorian might end up. Maybe — maybe! — it would be brushing against Alabama by 2 p.m. Wednesday.
Why? The answer is probably a simple one: Someone was trying to preserve Trump’s pride.
You see, on Sunday morning Trump had tweeted a warning to Alabamians that the hurricane was threatening their state.
In addition to Florida - South Carolina, North Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama, will most likely be hit (much) harder than anticipated. Looking like one of the largest hurricanes ever. Already category 5. BE CAREFUL! GOD BLESS EVERYONE!
In short order, a National Weather Service office in that state rejected the idea.
When ABC News’s Jonathan Karl noted that Trump had been wrong in saying the storm threatened Alabama, Trump raged about it on Twitter.
....when in fact, under certain original scenarios, it was in fact correct that Alabama could have received some “hurt.” Always good to be prepared! But the Fake News is only interested in demeaning and belittling. Didn’t play my whole sentence or statement. Bad people!
This was Monday evening. By midday Wednesday, when Trump was briefing reporters in the Oval Office, the little spur over Alabama had appeared.
It’s important to note that Trump appeared to refer to that little spur when displaying the map Wednesday, saying that it showed Dorian “going toward the Gulf.”
“Our original chart showed that it was going to be hitting Florida directly,” Trump said when displaying the altered map. “It was going to be hitting directly, and that would have affected a lot of other states. But that was the original chart. And you see it was going to hit not only Florida but Georgia. It could have — it was going toward the Gulf; that was what was originally projected.”
All of this backstory is important because it reveals just how obviously ridiculous Trump’s charade actually was. It’s trivial to check historic hurricane maps against what Trump was showing. It’s obvious that the original image didn’t include the marker-sketched loop, and Trump made no comment suggesting that the addition was erroneous or a mistake. It’s hard to argue, then, that the loop was made for any other reason than allowing Trump to talk about where the storm was headed — toward the Gulf of Mexico and Alabama.
Someday, perhaps in one of the voluminous history books detailing the internal machinations of the Trump presidency, we will learn how the marker addition to the hurricane map came to be. We will learn who suggested it be there and why. We will learn what Trump said as it was being added, and we will learn how the White House decided on its reaction after the fact.
For now, though, this seems like a fairly uncomplicated situation. Trump said something untrue. A map showed the truth. Suddenly, once in Trump’s hands, the map showed something somewhere in between.
However clumsily.
