There are no simple answers to addressing climate change, a slow-building but accelerating function of greenhouse gas emissions, largely from burning fossil fuels. Nearly every nation must implement myriad changes to fully constrain future warming, the sort of international agreement that is generally the domain of science-fiction movies involving hostile space aliens. It’s trivial, though, for Democratic candidates to propose doing more to curtail the problem than President Trump. After all, nearly all of the actions focused on climate change that Trump has taken have been to decrease the extent to which the United States addresses the issue.
So what are Democrats proposing? A variety of things. The 10 leading candidates (those who are both participating in CNN’s town halls and those who have made the cut for the next debate) propose spending $1 trillion to nearly $17 trillion to either slowly or dramatically reshape the U.S. economy.
Here’s that cheat sheet. (Links to each candidates’ proposals are at the bottom of this article.)
And, for the uninitiated, here is what each issue means.
Sens. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) and Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) didn’t explicitly embrace a price on carbon, with Sanders’s camp arguing that the urgency of acting on climate change might make this possibly incremental step too slow.
After reviewing the candidates’ proposals, we added three more categories.
President Trump approved the pipeline (meaning that it could enter the United States from Canada), and several candidates have indicated that they would revoke that approval. Two, Sanders and Yang, argue that all pipelines should be blocked.
Then there’s the economic impact. Each candidate offered an assessment of how much would be invested in addressing climate change, often incorporating estimates of both federal and total investment. (Former vice president Joe Biden’s plan, for example, imagines spending $1.7 trillion in federal investment and $5 trillion in total, including investment from state and local governments and the private sector.)
Several candidates also suggested that this investment would lead to a surge in new jobs. Retrofitting buildings and constructing green-energy production systems would, after all, require people to do much of that work. Sanders, who proposes the most spending, also has the most significant projected job-creation effects.
This overview necessarily omits a lot of nuance, which is why each candidate’s plan is linked below. But it hopefully offers some point of contrast as viewers consider candidates’ positions.
