Advertisement
Supported by
On top of his “Medicare for all” proposal, Mr. Sanders’s new plan would wipe out an estimated $81 billion in existing medical debt and ignore such debt in credit scores.
WASHINGTON — Bernie Sanders has long wanted to remake the health care system so no one will have to pay directly for medical care again. Now, he also wants to go back and cancel all the medical debts of people who have been billed under the current system.
The proposals reflect Mr. Sanders’s concern that the medical system has placed financial hardships on too many Americans, by discouraging them from seeking needed medical care — but also by saddling them with expensive and unfair bills that can harm their financial security, ding their credit and, in some cases, lead to bankruptcy. 
“We’re addressing it on both ends,” Mr. Sanders said. “We’re addressing it now by trying to help the people who have past due medical bills. And we’re addressing it by finally creating a health care system that guarantees coverage to people without any premiums, without any deductibles, without any out-of-pocket expenses.”
The plan calls for the government to negotiate and cancel the debts, though it does not specify the precise mechanism.
The plan would also create a public credit rating agency to “replace” for-profit companies like Equifax, and it would exclude medical debts from credit ratings. It would establish a new legal process, managed by the bankruptcy court system, to help adjudicate medical debts that are not yet in collections.
Studies suggest that medical debts can be less damaging to people’s credit than other kinds of debt, in part because the credit reporting agencies treat people’s ability to pay medical bills as less predictive of creditworthiness than, say, their ability to pay credit card bills or car payments. And, despite the news media’s focus on particularly large medical bills, the typical bill in collections is less than $600, according to the Health Affairs article.
Fear of medical debts causes some people to avoid needed medical care. And medical bills can affect other parts of people’s finances that are harder to measure, showing up as an unpaid credit card bill or a missed loan payment.
“I have a belief that if a plan like this could eliminate the debt that’s causing hardship, it could make a huge difference in people’s lives,” Mr. Antico said.
 
The plan “is well targeted,” said Neale Mahoney, a professor of economics at the University of Chicago, who studies medical debt. “It just may not be that much relief.”
Mr. Sanders said that, in conversations with people around the country, he had come to see medical debt as the most consistent and visceral manifestation of a broken health care system. 
Those kinds of deeply moving moments, he said, drove him to seek a new way to ameliorate that particular pain as part of his overall vision for changing the health care system. 
“I have always believed that health care is a human right, and it has always disturbed me immensely that so many of our people are uninsured or underinsured and can’t go to the doctor,” Mr. Sanders said. “But I have learned in this campaign something else, which I didn’t talk about previously, and that is the financial pain that this dysfunctional health care system is causing people.”
Margot Sanger-Katz reported from Washington, and Sydney Ember from New York.
Advertisement
