Advertisement
Supported by
Here are six things that happened on the presidential campaign trail this week.
“I feel like I’ve contributed all I can to this primary campaign, and it’s clearly not my time,” he said in an appearance on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.” “I’m going to end my presidential campaign, continue my work as mayor of New York City, and I’m going to keep speaking up for working people.”
And in a speech at a rally in Manhattan that drew thousands to Washington Square Park, she forcefully attacked corruption and invoked the power of women to bring about sweeping change. 
“The tragic story of the Triangle factory fire is a story about power,” Ms. Warren said. “A story of what happens when the rich and the powerful take control of government and use it to increase their own profits while they stick it to working people. But what happened in the aftermath of the fire is a different story about power — a story about our power, a story about what’s possible when we fight together as one.”
Mr. Sanders, who hails from neighboring Vermont, almost certainly must win New Hampshire again next year to have a chance at the nomination.
Ms. Warren, Mr. Sanders and Senator Kamala Harris of California were among those who called for the justice’s impeachment.
“He was put on the Court through a sham process and his place on the Court is an insult to the pursuit of truth and justice,” Ms. Harris wrote.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. called the revelations “profoundly troubling” but stopped short of demanding impeachment. Instead, he called for an investigation into “whether the Trump administration and Senate Republicans pressured the F.B.I. to ignore evidence.”
He also wants to tax the marijuana industry and invest the revenue in the communities of color disproportionately affected by the war on drugs. 
Every Democratic candidate supports decriminalizing marijuana, and most, including Mr. O’Rourke, support full legalization. But six candidates — Mr. Biden, Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado, Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana, Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii, Mayor Wayne Messam of Miramar, Fla., and former Representative Joe Sestak of Pennsylvania — want to leave the question of legalization up to the states.
Overheard on the campaign trail?
The state of California did not immediately respond to a request for comment. 
Advertisement
