Advertisement
Supported by
The controversy centers on whether President Trump manipulated foreign policy to pressure Ukraine to take action to damage Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s election bid.
With Mr. Trump seizing on a familiar defense, saying Democrats were undertaking a “witch hunt” against him, Mr. Biden called on the House of Representatives to begin a new investigation of whether the president sought the interference of a foreign government to bolster his re-election campaign.
“This appears to be an overwhelming abuse of power,” Mr. Biden said during a campaign swing in Iowa. “We have never seen anything like this from any president.”
Mr. Trump is said to have urged the Ukrainian president on a July 25 phone call to investigate Mr. Biden’s son, Hunter Biden, who did business in Ukraine while his father was vice president. Mr. Trump’s request is part of a secret whistle-blower complaint in the intelligence community that is said to involve Mr. Trump making an unspecified commitment to a foreign leader, according to two people familiar with the complaint.
The controversy has focused on whether Mr. Trump manipulated foreign policy — a military aid package to Ukraine had been delayed at the time of the phone call — to pressure the country’s newly elected president, Volodymyr Zelensky, to take action to damage Mr. Biden’s election bid.
On Saturday, Mr. Trump sought to deflect attention from that question by accusing Mr. Biden of acting improperly as vice president in calling for the ouster of a Ukrainian prosecutor who had overseen an inquiry into corruption related to the oligarch whose company employed Hunter Biden. 
“Now that the Democrats and the Fake News Media have gone ‘bust’ on every other of their Witch Hunt schemes, they are trying to start one just as ridiculous as the others, call it the Ukraine Witch Hunt,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter. He said that any effort to investigate him would fail, comparing it to the investigation by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel, into his ties to Russia during the 2016 campaign.
Intensifying a line of attack he and his allies have stoked for months, Mr. Trump said the real problem was Mr. Biden and questions about what the president described as “the Joe Biden demand that the Ukrainian Government fire a prosecutor who was investigating his son.” 
Referring to his conversation with Mr. Zelensky, Mr. Trump said: “Nothing was said that was in any way wrong, but Biden’s demand, on the other hand, was a complete and total disaster.”
The issue strikes a particular nerve for Mr. Biden, who has long feared putting his family under the harsh spotlight of a presidential campaign. During a two-minute encounter with reporters on Saturday morning, he grew irate, angrily insisting that he had never spoken with his son about any overseas work.
“You should be looking at Trump,” Mr. Biden said. “Trump is doing this because he knows I’ll beat him like a drum.”
Even as they avoided mentioning Mr. Biden, other Democratic presidential candidates moved quickly to capitalize on the new dynamic in the race. Senator Elizabeth Warren, who rarely mentions Mr. Trump in her stump speech, opened her remarks at a cattle call on Saturday afternoon by excoriating both the president and congressional Democrats.
“He has solicited another foreign government to attack our election system,” she told a crowd of 1,200 cheering Democratic voters gathered in Des Moines for an afternoon of primary speeches. “It is time to call out this illegal behavior and start impeachment proceedings right now.”
But Biden advisers also seized on the furor to portray Mr. Trump as fixated on, and worried about, a potential general election race against Mr. Biden. 
“There is only one candidate the president is trying to get foreign governments to dig up bogus dirt on,” Anita Dunn, a senior adviser to Mr. Biden, said.
Donna Brazile, the former Democratic National Committee chairwoman who led the party through Hillary Clinton’s loss to Mr. Trump three years ago, said the exchange on Saturday “in many ways feels like 2016.”
Just the prominent discussion of the actions of Mr. Biden and his son in Ukraine, regardless of the merits of the president’s accusations, has the potential to hurt Mr. Biden, Ms. Brazile said.
On Saturday morning, Mr. Trump posted a video mash-up of TV news footage of stories about Mr. Biden’s son. “This is the real and only story,” the president wrote. 
Citing the reports by journalists seemed contradictory given the president’s claim that the media had not reported on the issue. But the tweets signaled that Mr. Trump and his campaign organization would be doing as much as possible to sow doubt about Mr. Biden.
Senator Chris Coons of Delaware, a Biden backer, said that no matter who emerges as the Democratic nominee in 2020, that person will face misinformation and slashing personal attacks by the president and his campaign.
“You have any other nominee, Trump will do something comparable to try to disadvantage that nominee,” said Mr. Coons, as he walked with Mr. Biden into a Polk County Democratic Party event. “I don’t see anything about this story that is specific to Joe Biden.”
So far, Mr. Biden’s rivals, nearly all of whom converged on Iowa this weekend, have been quick to assail Mr. Trump while avoiding commentary about how the president’s accusations against the Bidens would affect the Democratic nominating contest. 
Even if Mr. Biden’s primary competitors don’t take direct aim, the perception of Mr. Biden’s son leveraging his connections cuts a stark contrast with two leading rivals, Ms. Warren and Senator Bernie Sanders, who have centered their candidacies around a fierce populist message of rooting out corruption in Washington.
It’s a message that worked in 2016 for Mr. Trump, who cast Ms. Clinton as the avatar of establishment self-dealing, a past-her-prime creature of Washington unable to adjust to the times and to produce real change.
Mr. Biden’s team is acutely aware of that comparison. After Mr. Biden initially gave only a meager retort on the Ukraine issue Friday, his campaign decided to go further.
Sensing an opportunity to highlight Mr. Trump’s fixation with Mr. Biden, his campaign released a statement in his name condemning the president for “abhorrent” conduct and demanding Mr. Trump release the transcript of his call with the Ukrainian leader and allow the director of national intelligence to release the whistle-blower’s claims to Congress.
Matt Stevens and Katie Glueck contributed reporting from New York and Katie Rogers and Jonathan Martin contributed reporting from Washington. 
Advertisement
