An Arizona gun store is crediting a major sales bump to Democratic presidential candidate Beto O’Rourke after turning his recent call for a buyback of high-powered firearms into a promotional event.
“If it’s a weapon that was designed to kill people on a battlefield, if the high-impact, high-velocity round when it hits your body shreds everything inside of your body because it was designed to do that, so that you would bleed to death on a battlefield not be able to get up and kill one of our soldiers,” O’Rourke said on the debate stage. “When we see that being used against children . . . hell, yes, we’re going to take your AR-15, your AK-47.”
Alpha Dog Guns launched its sale the next morning and said on Facebook it was “discounting AR15′s to such a low price that EVERY AMERICAN can afford one.”
There are so many AR-15s in U.S. consumer hands that it makes no sense to produce more, Colt says
O’Rourke’s campaign didn’t immediately respond to request for comment.
Boggs, the store’s owner, insists there was no grand strategy behind the promotion.
“We didn’t really start this off to be a political statement by any stretch of the imagination. I just happened to hop on Facebook and see his comments, and I was like, ‘Well maybe I’ll sell 20 rifles and see what happens,’” he told Fox.
“I don’t know anyone who owns an AR or an AK who is willing to actually give them up,” Boggs said in the interview. “You’re giving up your Second Amendment right.”
Support is moving in favor of gun control — but is it enough to pass new laws?
“I frankly think that clip will be played for years at Second Amendment rallies with organizations that try to scare people by saying Democrats are coming for your guns,” Sen. Christopher A. Coons (D-Del.) told CNN the day after O’Rourke’s debate remark. “I don’t think a majority of the Senate or the country is going to embrace mandatory buybacks. We need to focus on what we can get done.”
“Ask Chuck Schumer what he’s been able to get done,” O’Rourke said, speaking to reporters after a town hall in Aurora, Colo., on Thursday night. “We still don’t have [universal] background checks. Didn’t have them when he was in the majority, either. So, you know, the game that he’s played, the politics that he’s pursued have given us absolutely nothing and have produced a situation where we lose nearly 40,000 of our fellow Americans every year.”
O’Rourke made the comments after Schumer downplayed Democrats’ support for a mandatory buyback program for assault-style weapons.
Read more:
The top 15 Democratic presidential candidates, ranked
We’re asking 2020 Democrats where they stand on key issues
How the NRA hijacked history
Free daily updates delivered just for you
Free daily updates delivered just for you
