There’s one element that’s been missing from the timeline surrounding a still-secret whistleblower complaint apparently involving a conversation President Trump had with a foreign leader.
That effort, led by Trump attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani, theorizes that Biden acted inappropriately in 2016 when he called for the ouster of a Ukrainian prosecutor at the risk of Ukraine losing substantial foreign aid. The prosecutor may have been investigating a company that had Biden’s son Hunter as a board member, but the prosecutor was also a target of widespread criticism for failing to adequately crack down on public corruption. The Bidens have repeatedly insisted that the then-vice president’s demand of Ukraine wasn’t linked to Hunter Biden’s work.
“Corruption” is precisely how Giuliani referred to his Biden investigation on CNN on Thursday night.
“He had every right to say to the Ukrainian president, ‘We have two outstanding allegations of massive corruption, and you should investigate it,’ ” Giuliani said when asked by host Chris Cuomo whether Trump had mentioned Biden to Zelensky.
“Look at Joe Biden,” he said. “He calls them and says, ‘Don’t you dare persecute, if you don’t fire this prosecutor’ — The prosecutor was after his son. Then he said, ‘If you fire the prosecutor, you’ll be okay. And if you don’t fire the prosecutor, we’re not giving you $2 billion in loan guarantees,’ or whatever he was supposed to give. Can you imagine if I did that?”
But the timing is important. That was May 19, the day before Zelensky’s inauguration and about a week after Giuliani canceled his trip.
“I think you might want to listen, there isn’t anything wrong with listening,” Trump said then. “If somebody called from a country, Norway, ‘we have information on your opponent’? Oh, I think I’d want to hear it.”
There are a lot of moving parts here, and it’s not confirmed that the whistleblower complaint specifically deals with Trump having discussed the Biden allegations with Ukraine’s president. But the following order of events is correct:
There are gaps of various lengths between those events, and there isn’t yet a demonstrated, public throughline between them. If such a throughline emerges, however, the ramifications are significant.
The whistleblower complaint may be that throughline.
Free daily updates delivered just for you
Free daily updates delivered just for you
