Three House Democratic chairman are threatening to subpoena documents pertaining to President Trump’s request that a foreign leader investigate a political adversary amid growing demands that the House move to impeach Trump. 
In a joint statement Monday, House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Eliot L. Engel (D-N.Y.), House Intelligence Committee Chairman Adam B. Schiff (D-Calif.) and House Oversight Committee Chairman Elijah E. Cummings (D-Md.) criticized Secretary of State Mike Pompeo for withholding documents about the Ukraine matter. They gave Pompeo until Thursday to let the panels know if he intends to comply with a request they sent him two weeks ago.
“Seeking to enlist a foreign actor to interfere with an American election undermines our sovereignty, democracy, and the Constitution, which the president is sworn to preserve, protect, and defend,” the chairmen wrote in the letter. “Yet the president and his personal attorney now appear to be openly engaging in precisely this type of abuse of power involving the Ukrainian government ahead of the 2020 election.” 
They later added: “If press reports are accurate, such corrupt use of presidential power for the president’s personal political interest — and not for the national interest — is a betrayal of the president’s oath of office and cannot go unchecked.” 
The request is unlikely to stem the calls from many Democrats to impeach Trump. But it sets up yet another Thursday deadline, creating a make-or-break moment this week that some Democrats say could be the tipping point on impeachment.
Democrats have also given the action director of national intelligence Joseph Maguire until Thursday to turn over a whistleblower’s complaint, which The Washington Post reported centers on Trump’s communications with Ukraine. 
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) also gave the administration until Thursday to turn the information over, threatening a “whole new state of investigation” if it refuses. 
Trump admitted on Sunday that he spoke to Ukraine’s president about reopening an investigation of a business with links to former vice president Joe Biden’s son.
