Reporting suggests that Trump pressured Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky to investigate former vice president Joe Biden multiple times in a phone call in July, a demand that apparently was part of a still-secret whistleblower complaint targeting Trump’s administration. There are additional questions about the timing of that call and if the administration’s decision to subsequently withhold aid to Ukraine was tied to Trump’s request.
Ukraine “want[s] to do the right thing,” Trump said. “And they know about corruption, and they probably know that Joe Biden and his son are corrupt. They probably know that. Joe Biden and his son are corrupt. All right? But the fake news doesn’t want to report it because they’re Democrats."
Trump’s assertion that Biden is corrupt stems from his misrepresentation or misunderstanding of a request Biden made publicly as vice president.
Talking to reporters while sitting next to Polish President Andrzej Duda, Trump escalated his attacks on Biden.
“If that ever happened — if a Republican ever did what Joe Biden did, if a Republican ever said what Joe Biden said, they’d be getting the electric chair by right now,” Trump claimed.
This is ridiculous, of course, both because of its stark hyperbole and because it’s simply untrue.
In fact, Trump has tried to claim that his conversation with Zelensky was an echo of exactly what Biden actually did.
“It’s very important to talk about corruption. If you don’t talk about corruption, why would you give money to a country that you think is corrupt?” Trump said of that call during a separate conversation with reporters Monday.
Trump claims that Biden made that demand to protect his son, an assertion of corruption for which there’s no evidence. Trump is making that claim, meanwhile, to paper over what’s been reported: that the demand Trump made in his phone call was less about “talking corruption” than trying to gin up some statement from Ukraine that what Biden did was actually corrupt.
Trump says Biden did what Trump is accused of doing; Trump claims innocence by saying he only did what the best available evidence suggests Biden had actually done.
The extent to which the reporting on his call with Ukraine frustrates Trump was made obvious as he went on to bash the media as hopelessly biased.
“Look at the double standards,” he said to the reporters in the room. “You people ought to be ashamed of yourself. And not all — we have some great journalists around. But you got a lot of crooked journalists. You’re crooked as hell.”
This claim is predicated on the idea that the reporting about his conversation with Zelensky is erroneous. The easy way to debunk that reporting is to make notes from that call public — ideally without Sharpie-drawn additions — or to release the whistleblower complaint to Congress.
Trump spent the first two years of his presidency under the cloud of a special counsel investigation that ended without conclusively clearing him of wrongdoing. With that in the rearview mirror, Trump then reportedly embarked on an effort to do something remarkably similar to one of the worst-case allegations in the Russia probe: seek electoral assistance from a foreign nation in the form of dirt on Biden, now a presidential candidate.
After furiously attacking the media, Trump wrapped up his remarks.
“Okay, thank you very much,” he said to reporters. “I hope you enjoyed it.”
