For all of the fulmination about the complexity of the still-expanding controversy surrounding President Trump’s conversations with the president of Ukraine, the reality is fairly simple. Trump, according to reporting from The Post and the Wall Street Journal, repeatedly pressed President Volodymyr Zelensky, who was inaugurated in May, to investigate former vice president Joe Biden and his son Hunter.
Biden, of course, leads the field in the Democratic primary to face Trump in next year’s general election. The investigation Trump wanted to see was meant to focus on Biden’s push in late 2015 to oust a Ukrainian prosecutor who’d earned the ire of U.S. and international officials for turning a blind eye to corruption. Trump and his allies claim without evidence that Biden advocated for the prosecutor’s firing because the prosecutor may have been investigating a company on whose board Hunter Biden sat.
In short, then, Trump may have tried to leverage congressionally sanctioned aid to boost his own reelection chances — or, at least, he reportedly leveraged his position as president to push a foreign nation to aid his reelection campaign.
In short order, Trump’s allies — by now well experienced in waving away concerns about his presidency — moved into action. In a series of appearances on television and radio, they identified the real wrongdoing in the situation, blaming a diaspora of people and organizations in an effort to downplay or erase questions about Trump.
Biden has been the most common target of Trump’s defenders and of Trump himself.
The way those defenses are offered, though, varies.
“If there was election interference that took place by the vice president, I think the American people deserve to know,” Pompeo said, referring to Biden — and echoing the questions that have lingered around Trump’s 2016 victory since before his presidency began. “We know there was interference in the 2016 election and if it’s the case that there was something going on with the President or his family that caused a conflict of interest and Vice President Biden behaved in a way that was inconsistent with the way leaders ought to operate, I think the American people deserve to know that.”
It’s worth noting the particularly sloppy defense that Fox News chose to highlight. It was an interview with Rep. Devin Nunes (R-Calif.), the ranking Republican on the House Intelligence Committee. The suggestion Nunes made wasn’t only that Biden was culpable but, indeed, that he was already paying a political cost for being so deeply mired in this controversy.
The allegation that Biden did something wrong in December 2015 didn’t originate with an effort by Hillary Clinton to keep Biden out of the race, given that he announced he wasn’t running that year in October 2015. What’s more, Nunes’s claim that Biden’s lead was “down to zero” was apparently based on a new poll in Iowa where Biden is running even with Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.).
That poll was conducted before the Ukraine story emerged in the news.
“What I do find inappropriate is the fact that Vice President Biden at the time’s son did very significant business dealings in Ukraine,” Mnuchin said of the controversy. “I, for one, find that to be concerning. And, to me, that is the issue perhaps that should be further investigated.”
“I don’t understand,” Tapper replied. “So it is okay for Donald Trump Jr. and Eric Trump Jr. to do business all over the world, it’s okay for Ivanka Trump to have copyrights approved all over the world while President Trump is president, but while Vice President Joe Biden was vice president, his son shouldn’t have been able to do business dealings?”
Mnuchin stumbled.
“Again, I don’t — I don’t really want to go into more of these details,” he said, “other than to say …”
“Well, you’re just setting a precedent that the president is violating,” Tapper replied.
“Again, I think there is a significant difference in what you’re saying, okay, or what I was saying between Biden and his son’s relationship with the Ukraine oligarch,” Mnuchin said, “and potential business dealings that the Trump Organization has had which predated his presidency.”
Trump and his allies have repeatedly pointed to Ukraine and Ukrainian politics to defend Trump since he took office. As questions arose about the 2016 Trump campaign’s interactions with Russian actors, Trump’s team tried to gin up a countervailing theory that Ukraine was working to boost Hillary Clinton.
In an interview with conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt on Monday, Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) suggested that Ukraine’s role broadly should earn scrutiny.
“All things Trump have been looked at regarding Russia. Now it’s time for all things Ukraine to be looked at,” Graham said. “I like Joe Biden. I’ve been a friend of his for a very long time. But we can’t have two standards here. The prosecutor was looking at things in the Ukraine, and he got fired, and there’s all kind of allegations about the Ukraine dumping information into the legal system and political system in 2016 about Manafort and others, you know, Hunter Biden, what kind of situation did he have financially? I’m hoping somebody will take a look at all things Ukraine like they did with Russia from the Department of Justice.”
The theory that Ukraine was “dumping information” in 2016 centers on two incidents. In one, a contractor with the Democratic National Committee sought help from people at the Ukrainian Embassy in digging into then-Trump campaign manager Paul Manafort’s work in that country. In the other, evidence that Manafort had received secret payments from a pro-Russian political party was released by a Ukrainian organization in August 2016, leading to his ouster from the campaign.
This story came to national attention after the Trump administration sought to prevent Congress from seeing the original complaint from a whistleblower inside the intelligence community. Mirroring months of attacks on the FBI agents who’d probed the Trump campaign’s interactions with Russia, Trump allies cast the whistleblower as a “deep state” “spy” who had behaved dishonorably in bringing the story to light.
Rep. Matt Gaetz (R-Fla.), one of Trump’s most energetic defenders, told reporters that there are “people in the intelligence community and other parts of the government who just have it out for the president.”
“I don’t have any worries about the president,” he added.
At an event in Texas over the weekend, Sen. John Cornyn (R-Tex.) identified his own culprit in the situation: reporters covering the story.
Cornyn is not alone. In his interview with Hewitt, Graham suggested that the Ukraine story “makes the [Justice Brett] Kavanaugh story look like good journalism” — a reference to assertions from conservatives that the New York Times’s article about accusations against Kavanaugh was fatally flawed.
Trump shared a clip from Fox News in which Rep. Mark Meadows (R-N.C.) blames the media for the story, suggesting that it was simply part of the same complaints about Trump that have existed since he took office.
pic.twitter.com/le48VOltE0
“It’s exactly the kind of thing they’ve been accusing Trump of all along,” Meadows said. “Can you imagine if the prosecutor in Ukraine, if his name was ‘Bob Mueller,’ what would have happened?”
It’s not clear what that means.
This is the angle taken by Trump.
That’s a big gamble for Trump.
