But on Monday, Trump appeared to inch ever closer to admitting the underlying allegation raised by that same whistleblower.
Talking to reporters Monday morning at the United Nations, Trump suggested that there would be nothing wrong with him withholding funding to a country such as Ukraine if it refused to root out “corruption” — hypothetically speaking, of course.
“We’re supporting a country; we want to make sure that country is honest,” Trump said. “It’s very important to talk about corruption. If you don’t talk about corruption, why would you give money to a country that you think is corrupt? . . . So it’s very important that, on occasion, you speak to somebody about corruption.”
Giuliani offered a similar argument Thursday, while clarifying that he did not know exactly what had gone down.
“The reality is the president of the United States has every right to say to another leader of a foreign country, ‘You got to straighten up before we give you a lot of money,’” Giuliani said. “It is perfectly appropriate for [Trump] to ask a foreign government to investigate this massive crime that was made by a former vice president.”
BARTIROMO: Did the president threaten to cut off aid to the Ukraine?
GIULIANI: No, no that was a false story.
BARTIROMO: One hundred percent?
GIULIANI: Well, I can’t tell you if it’s 100 percent.
Trump seemed to revert to denying the allegation in a tweet not long after he talked to the media.
....know the correct facts. Is he on our Country’s side. Where does he come from. Is this all about Schiff & the Democrats again after years of being wrong?
The progression of the comments from the Trump team follows a familiar pattern. To get ahead of bad news, Trump acolytes often will deny or decline to confirm the underlying charge, but also offer a preemptive defense in case it’s proven. As evidence finds its way out, though — and as Trump himself keeps talking publicly — we eventually learn that the initial suspicions were correct and they were offering a preemptive defense for a reason.
Just because both Trump and Giuliani are offering preemptive defenses, that doesn’t prove what the whistleblower said was accurate. We don’t even know exactly what the whistleblower alleges, beyond that it involves Ukraine and some kind of “promise,” and that it was regarding more than a single communication.
But if the complaint is completely without merit, you don’t really need to litigate what might happen if it turns out to be true. And history suggests this is a strong signal of what’s to come — whether Trump’s talks with the Ukrainians included an explicit quid pro quo or not.
