Advertisement
Supported by
Mr. Schultz said he had concluded that an independent bid would pose too great a risk of helping President Trump win a second term.
Howard Schultz, the former chief executive of Starbucks who took steps earlier this year to prepare to run for president as an independent, announced Friday that he was abandoning those plans.
“Not enough people today are willing to consider backing an independent candidate because they fear doing so might lead to re-electing a uniquely dangerous incumbent president,” Mr. Schultz wrote.
Mr. Schultz, 66, said he did not want to interfere in the 2020 race should Democrats select a more moderate nominee. He criticized the party’s more progressive candidates, writing, “I’m also concerned that far-left policy ideas being advanced by several Democratic candidates will further alienate voters who believe those ideas will inflict more economic harm than good.”
One of the Democrats in the race, Tom Steyer, is a billionaire like Mr. Schultz. Despite spending millions of dollars of his own money on advertising, he failed to qualify for next week’s debate because of low support in polls. 
His move toward a campaign instantly drew criticism from both high-profile Democrats and President Trump, beginning what would become months of public pleading by those who worried that an independent bid would only help Mr. Trump get re-elected by splitting the anti-Trump vote. 
Mr. Schultz had long been a Democrat — an economically conservative, socially liberal businessman who worried aloud that the party had moved too far left. As he tested the waters on his book tour, he spoke of what he saw as a broken two-party system and a sizable chunk of moderate voters exhausted by political extremes. 
In his letter on Friday, Mr. Schultz said that if he moved forward with a run, it was possible that his name would appear on ballots even if a moderate Democrat won the nomination — “not a risk I am willing to take,” he wrote. 
Mr. Schultz also suffered a back injury in April, which he cited in his letter as another factor in his decision. 
Mr. Schultz said that the money he had been prepared to spend on a presidential campaign would instead be invested “in people, organizations and ideas that promote honesty, civility and results in our politics, and that move the country beyond two-party gridlock.” 
“Among my early efforts will be to advocate for increased national service opportunities for young people,” he said. “I will continue to work with my wife, Sheri, supporting our nation’s veterans and opportunity youth at the Schultz Family Foundation. And I will personally continue to encourage business leaders to play a larger role in creating access to opportunities for people in the communities they serve, and beyond.”
Advertisement
