Advertisement
Supported by
Naval Special Warfare Command fired the three senior leaders of SEAL Team Seven on Friday, saying their failure in leadership caused a breakdown of good order and discipline.
The top SEAL commander, Rear Adm. Collin P. Green, relieved SEAL Team Seven’s commanding officer, Cmdr. Edward Mason; the executive officer, Lt. Cmdr. Luke Im; and the team’s top enlisted leader, Command Master Chief Hugh Spangler because of a loss of confidence, according to a spokeswoman for the SEALs, Cmdr. Tamara Lawrence.
The unusual move comes amid a flurry of high-profile incidents in the SEAL teams, prompting attempts by Navy leadership to bring the elite commandos under control.
Friday’s action was spurred by how the leaders dealt with actions by Team Seven’s Foxtrot platoon, Commander Lawrence said. The platoon was abruptly removed from Iraq in late July after reports of serious misconduct during a Fourth of July celebration.
Officials did not release any details at the time. But a senior Navy official with knowledge of the matter said the Navy was investigating reports that the platoon held a Fourth of July party in which a senior enlisted member of the platoon raped a female service member attached to the platoon, another SEAL made unwanted sexual contact with a second female service member and some team members consumed alcohol against regulations.
The official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a continuing investigation, said no one had yet been charged.
When the entire platoon invoked the right to remain silent, commanders outside the team decided to send the whole platoon home.
Navy SEALs at Coronado, Calif., said removing a team’s top three leaders, known as the triad, is uncommon, but expected when a team has so many problems. Many longtime Navy officers think the firings are only the beginning of a larger house cleaning in the SEALs.
In SEAL Team 10, based in Virginia, an investigation revealed widespread use of cocaine and other drugs, and drug testing efforts so lax that SEALs considered them a joke.
Military regulations forbid the consumption of alcohol in Iraq and Afghanistan, two predominantly Muslim countries. But its presence among American troops serving there is hardly rare and, in many units, including the SEAL teams, leaders sometimes turn a blind eye to moderate use.
“Naval Special Warfare insists on a culture where ethical adherence is equally important to tactical proficiency,” the Navy said in a statement when Foxtrot platoon was recalled. “Good order and discipline is critical to the mission. We’re actively reinforcing, with the entire force, basic leadership, readiness, responsibility and ethical principles that must form the foundation of special operations.”
Advertisement
