Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — Governors, mayors, attorneys general, state delegations, teachers and pediatricians have flooded the Agriculture Department with comments that overwhelmingly oppose the Trump administration’s proposed rule to limit eligibility for food stamps — and cut millions from the nation’s pre-eminent food assistance program.
The department will next have to sift through the public comments and “consider potential changes from the proposal in crafting the final rule,” the U.S.D.A. said in a statement, adding, “We do not currently have a projected completion date.”
In this case, the Agriculture Department says it is merely moving to close a loophole that has allowed people with higher incomes and assets to receive unneeded food assistance.
The department was changing the rules to prevent “abuse of a critical safety net system, so those who need food assistance the most are the only ones who receive it,” Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue said in a statement in July when the proposal was released.
The Agriculture Department’s own analysis estimated that more than three million people would lose their benefits and 500,000 children would lose access to free school meals if the government moved forward with tightening a rule that now offers families on Temporary Assistance for Needy Families automatic eligibility for food stamps, even if they have higher incomes and asset accumulation. The rule the department seeks to change allows people with incomes up to 200 percent of the poverty level — about $50,000 for a family of four — and more than $3,500 in assets to receive food stamps.
Lisa Davis, the senior vice president of No Kid Hungry, an advocacy group, said the current rule “helps working poor families accumulate modest assets for a rainy day” and encourages them to take on more hours or higher wages without worrying about losing assistance. She was not surprised by the negative response.
“I think this proposal has really struck a chord with people, and the outcry against it has been swift and loud,” Ms. Davis said.
But social service professionals expressed clear concern about a ripple effect as families are pushed off the food-stamp rolls. Children who live in households that receive food assistance are automatically eligible for free school meals. If the proposed rule is finalized, many children would lose meals at home and at school.
“It upsets me to no end, especially when you’re talking about my kids,” said Robert Lewis, director of nutrition services at the El Monte School District, in California, which serves 9,000 students. “I hate to even imagine even a portion of those kids not being able to have food.”
Expansive food stamp rolls have been an issue before. Conservatives have long held that the program has become too large and too open to abuse, and that lax eligibility rules were leading to government dependency.
Ellen Vollinger, the food stamp director at the Food Research and Action Center, an anti-hunger group, accused the Trump administration of trying to “do through rule-making what Congress had already said no to.”
“We don’t think that they have a very good basis to be doing this given the legislative history,” she said.
Advertisement
