Advertisement
Supported by
To observe Mr. O’Rourke recently is to witness an unfiltered attempt at a midcourse transformation. He says he doesn’t care about political niceties.
He told a story of how he was killing time at a park a few hours earlier when he happened upon a woman pounding on a set of drums, with her car parked next to her, and the radio blasting “Any Way You Want It” by Journey.
“And I thought, that is so punk rock!” Mr. O’Rourke effused.
Mr. O’Rourke, the pin-balling presidential candidate from Texas, told the audience that he felt fortunate to have witnessed such “a beautiful, powerful, transcendent moment.” He then got to the point of his story.
Or not: “I don’t even know why I’m telling you this,” he acknowledged. “Except that I had to share this with somebody.”
Mr. O’Rourke’s entire campaign sometimes feels like one giant non sequitur. Where was this story going? Was there a point to it? And did he even care if anyone was taken aback?
The answer that last question would seem to be “no,” and has become especially resonant since Aug. 3, when 22 people were killed in a mass shooting in Mr. O’Rourke’s hometown, El Paso.
He was also admonished by many Democratic leaders who worried that his vow to take away guns would confirm every caricature of a radicalized left intent on punishing law-abiding gun-owners. “I don’t know of any other Democrat who agrees with Beto O’Rourke,” Senator Chuck Schumer, the minority leader, said in a conference call with reporters.
Mr. O’Rourke said he took pride in getting attacked by Mr. Schumer and President Trump (who had tweeted at him) on the same day. “It shows me we’re doing something right,” Mr. O’Rourke said Thursday, following a visit to a marijuana dispensary in Oakland, Calif. He said that provoking Mr. Trump and particularly Mr. Schumer showed he was willing to speak plainly and directly and not as a normal politician would. Later that day, in a session with reporters, Mr. O’Rourke would taunt Mr. Schumer for doing “absolutely nothing” on guns. “Ask Chuck Schumer what he’s been able to get done,” he said.
For his part, Mr. O’Rourke, says he could give a damn about adhering to the niceties of campaigns, and he has been proving as much with his frequent deployment of four-letter words more incendiary than “damn.”
“Over the last five weeks, I’ve just been focused on saying what’s on my mind, being myself,” Mr. O’Rourke said. “And not really in the slightest being interested in polls, or how things poll, or what you’re supposed to say.”
That’s fortunate, or at least handy spin, given that Mr. O’Rourke’s poll numbers have been stuck in the low-single digits for months, with negligible movement since El Paso. The blessing, say Mr. O’Rourke’s campaign advisers and supporters, is that he is once again the unvarnished candidate that captivated them during his near miss Senate campaign in Texas last year against the incumbent Republican Ted Cruz.
“Oh, I’m really grateful to anyone who would forgo a perfectly fine movie or dinner date to spend some time on a Friday night with a candidate for the presidency,” Mr. O’Rourke replied, offering perhaps the only possible answer a politician could give (what candidate would admit to being “deflated?”).
His zigzagging trajectory over the last year can be ordered into pronounced phases. Last fall — the peak of his Beto-Mania Phase — ended in a narrow loss to Mr. Cruz. Nevertheless, the hype persisted. “We did not see that coming,” Mr. O’Rourke said of the continued attention, which ushered in a new phase.
Late on election night, a couple of supporters wandered into Mr. O’Rourke’s El Paso home to commiserate. “They were just these drunk dudes in their teens who were bummed out and decided to come to Beto’s house,” Mr. O’Rourke recalled. “They just walked in and were like ‘Hey dude, we’re just so sorry you lost, can I get a selfie with you?’”
“And I was like, ‘Sure, but you can’t just walk into someone’s house like this.’ And they were like ‘Oh, I’m so sorry, I’m so sorry.’”
After the Democratic debate in Houston this month, Mr. O’Rourke said he had struggled in the earlier debates because “I suck at acting.” He felt that he had been too scripted and rehearsed before, so he tried to be less so this time. “The first 30 or 40 minutes is like” — he growled out the sound of an explosion, pantomiming a hand-motion over his head that seemed to signify his brain blowing up. (Debates can be disorienting, is what appeared to be his point.)
At one point, Cory Booker was asked whether Americans should abide by vegan diets, as he does. The New Jersey senator replied: “No,” and added, “actually, I want to translate that into Spanish — ‘No.”
Mr. O’Rourke can sometimes come off like an excited adolescent talking about a campaign-themed teen tour. He is collecting experiences, searching for something authentic.
Here is something authentic: fear, of which there is no shortage in the country, especially around guns. The morning after the debate, Mr. O’Rourke pulled out his cellphone and called up a text message he had just received. It was from an unidentified party inviting him — and not in a nice way — to “come take my AK-47.”
“I have been getting these messages from different numbers, emails, you know,” he said, explaining that people have been arrested after making threats on his life.
Mr. O’Rourke has three young children and is fully aware of what’s possible. No security detail is evident around him. People show up with guns at his rallies and many know where he lives. He has become one of the biggest lightning rods in this hottest of national debates. Does he himself get scared?
“For me, this is a great question,” Mr. O’Rourke said. “I think it goes to the heart of why we haven’t made progress.” He was referring to “progress” in stopping gun violence, not progress as a campaign.
Yes, people are scared, he said, intimidated by the threats and perceived political risks and frightened into silence. “People keep begging us to do something,” he said. “It’s really powerful. And that’s the judgment I fear, more than people threatening us with guns.”
Is this a higher purpose or another phase? At the very least, Mr. O’Rourke has burrowed a place for himself in the 2020 free-for-all, wherever he is headed. He has gotten people’s attention again, including from the president, who tweeted that Mr. O’Rourke’s vow to confiscate some assault weapons had “made it much harder to make a deal” on guns. “Dummy Beto,” is how the president addressed him.
Asked about this in San Quentin, Mr. O’Rourke said he “could care less.”
Advertisement
