One bit of rhetoric that has been central to President Trump’s political career is the primacy of Americans above everyone else. His “America First” mantra has been used to isolate the United States internationally and to defend his dramatic immigration policies.
“Republicans believe that we must take care of our own citizens first,” he said at a rally on Monday night in New Mexico — in contrast to immigrants who enter the country illegally. He’d just made that point, reading from the teleprompter: “Our scarce resources are in danger of being rapidly depleted to the point that we will be unable to effectively care for our own citizens,” he said, “you and our existing homeless populations, many of whom are American veterans, right?” 
An administration official wanted to assure The Post that things hadn’t progressed too far, telling Jeff Stein, Josh Dawsey and Tracy Jan that “we’re not rounding people up or anything yet.” 
From New Mexico, Trump on Tuesday flew to the San Francisco Peninsula in California. San Francisco is one of the cities that have been an apparent target of Trump’s frustration over homelessness, and, we learned Monday, that problem overlaps with America’s veterans.
Trump was asked about possible plans to address homelessness on the flight and said it was something he was considering.
“We can’t let Los Angeles, San Francisco and numerous other cities destroy themselves by allowing what’s happening,” Trump said, according to a report from the White House news pool. “And I’m speaking to tenants — in some cases foreign people, foreign tenants — but they have where they’re tenants in buildings throughout various cities in California, and other places … where they want to leave the country. They can’t believe what’s happening.” 
He mentioned police getting sick of addressing homelessness problems, then returning to those tenants.
“We have people living in our … best highways, our best streets, our best entrances to buildings and pay tremendous taxes, where people in those buildings pay tremendous taxes, where they went to those locations because of the prestige,” he said. “In many cases, they came from other countries, and they moved to Los Angeles or they moved to San Francisco because of the prestige of the city, and all of a sudden they have tents. Hundreds and hundreds of tents and people living at the entrance to their office building. And they want to leave.
“And the people of San Francisco are fed up, and the people of Los Angeles are fed up,” he added. “And we’re looking at it, and we’ll be doing something about it.” 
His answer on Tuesday makes a lot more sense. The focus of his concern, as presented to reporters on Air Force One, wasn’t Americans or veterans, but foreigners who rent or buy high-end real estate, people who get frustrated at seeing those experiencing homelessness at the entrance to their office buildings. It’s the sort of complaint that might resonate with someone who owns real estate in major U.S. cities that is used for housing or office space.
First things first.
