President Trump’s former campaign manager Corey Lewandowski showed up at Tuesday’s hearing of the House Judiciary Committee ready to stonewall. But his stonewall couldn’t block everything. One particular answer he gave was very curious.
The event most at issue in Lewandowski’s testimony was Trump’s request that he deliver a message to then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions about how then-special counsel Robert S. Mueller III’s investigation was “very unfair” to Trump. Democrats have said that could constitute obstruction of justice or signal an obstructive intent by the president. But as Mueller’s report details, Lewandowski didn’t actually deliver that message.
So Rep. Hank Johnson (D-Ga.) probed Lewandowski as to why. Lewandowski had said earlier in the hearing that he didn’t see anything wrong with Trump’s request. If that was true, why didn’t he pass along the message? Johnson tried to goad Lewandowski, suggesting that he had “chickened out” on delivering the message because he got “squeamish.”
Lewandowski disputed that characterization. His explanation? “I went on vacation.”
That prompted some laughter in the hearing room. Lewandowski added that his kids were his priority.
He later said he wanted to give Sessions the message in a “relaxed,” face-to-face meeting, but that meeting never materialized after Sessions canceled.
Let’s take that at face value for a moment. Lewandowski gets a request from the president of the United States — a man whose campaign he ran for months and whose success put Lewandowski on the national map. The request is to deliver a high-profile message to the attorney general of the United States about an issue of huge importance in American politics, the special counsel’s investigation.
Lewandowski suggests that this was something that simply got lost in the shuffle, and that he never followed up because he went on vacation and was not able to get the right kind of in-person audience with Sessions. He said he wanted to do it over dinner.
“I wanted to get an opportunity to speak with Jeff in a more relaxed atmosphere,” Lewandowski said.
On June 19, 2017, the President met one-on-one in the Oval Office with his former campaign manager Corey Lewandowski, a trusted advisor outside the government, and dictated a message for Lewandowski to deliver to Sessions. The message said that Sessions should publicly announce that, notwithstanding his recusal from the Russia investigation, the investigation was “very unfair” to the President, the President had done nothing wrong, and Sessions planned to meet with the Special Counsel and “let [him] move forward with investigating election meddling for future elections.” Lewandowski said he understood what the President wanted Sessions to do.
The Mueller report also indicates that Lewandowski “stored the notes in a safe at his home, which he stated was his standard procedure with sensitive items.” That also suggests he either viewed it as very important (and thus, you would think he would follow up on it) or potentially problematic.
Expect this to be a significant focus of the remainder of the hearing.
