Corey Lewandowski dodged House Democrats’ questions about a key episode of potential obstruction of justice laid out in the special counsel’s report, frustrating lawmakers during a House Judiciary hearing and striking a defiant tone that received immediate praise from the president. 
Lewandowski, who worked as Trump’s presidential campaign manager but never for him in the White House, said Tuesday he was respecting the White House’s wishes that he not answer questions about his conversations with the president as Democrat after Democrat pressed him for answers.
“The White House has directed that I not disclose the substance of any discussion with the president or his advisers to protect executive branch confidentiality,” he said. “I recognize this is not my privilege, but I am respecting the White House’s decision.”
But it was Lewandowski’s attitude that most infuriated panel Democrats — even prompting a contempt threat from Rep. David N. Cicilline (D-R.I.). Time after time, Lewandowski tried to show that this was his performance and he was the man in control, even tweeting from the room about his possible 2020 bid for the Senate and lecturing a congressman for saying the tooth fairy wasn’t real. 
“New website just launched to help a potential senate run. Sign up now!” he wrote during a panel break, a reference to his potential challenge to Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.).
Democrats, meanwhile, chided him for being disrespectful and filibustering their hearing. “Mr. Lewandowski, you're like a fish being cleaned with a spoon; it’s very hard to get an answer out of you,” said Rep. Hank Johnson (D-Ga.). Added a frustrated Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee (D-Tex.): “This is the House Judiciary Committee! Not a house party!”
 “This is my time,” yelled the usually even-tempered Rep. Pramila Jayapal (D-Wash.) when Lewandowski talked over her. “You are a witness before the Judiciary Committee. Please act like it!”
The hearing was the first under the committee’s new rules as it weighs whether to draft articles of impeachment against Trump. House Democrats subpoenaed Lewandowski to testify about potential obstruction of justice episodes described in former special counsel Robert S. Mueller III’s report into Russian interference in the 2016 election. 
According to the Mueller report, Trump personally asked Lewandowski to persuade then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions to limit the special counsel’s investigation. Lewandowski never delivered the message, the report found — instead passing it off to another Trump official. 
But if Democrats were hoping to elicit more information from him to build their impeachment case, Lewandowski dashed those hopes quickly. He set the tone in his opening statement, mocking Democrats and ridiculing what he called the “fake Russia collusion narrative.”
“We as a nation would be better served if elected officials like you concentrated your efforts to combat the true crises facing our country as opposed to going down rabbit holes like this hearing,” Lewandowski said. “If instead of focusing on petty and personal politics, the committee focused on solving the challenges of this generation, imagine how many people we could help.”
He later added: “It is now clear the [Mueller] investigation was populated by many Trump haters who had their own agenda — to try to take down a duly elected president of the United States,” he said. “As for actual ‘collusion,’ or ‘conspiracy,’ there was none. What there has been however, is harassment of the president from the day he won the election.”
Throughout the hearing, it was clear Lewandowski was playing to an audience of one: the president. The combative former campaign aide extolled Trump for “receiv[ing] more votes than any candidate in the history of the Republican Party,” lavishing praise on him for creating a “historical movement.”
“Donald Trump was a private citizen and had no more responsibility than I did to protect the 2016 election,” he said. “That fell to the Obama-Biden Administration and they failed. ”
Trump, who was watching the hearing, hailed the performance.
“Such a beautiful Opening Statement by Corey Lewandowski! Thank you Corey!” he tweeted.
But even getting Lewandowski to confirm what he told Mueller proved tricky. House Judiciary Committee Chairman Jerrold Nadler (D-N.Y.) tried to ask him about a key meeting with Trump detailed in the Mueller report, but Lewandowski wanted to see the specific language before he would answer any questions.
 “Do you not have an independent recollection?” Nadler asked, flabbergasted that he couldn’t — or wouldn’t — remember. 
Rep. Jackson Lee was next and had no better luck. She tried to ask Lewandowski about why Trump went to him and not others in the White House to try to get Sessions to limit the scope of the Mueller investigation. But Lewandowski once again wouldn’t go there.
“I’m respecting the executive branch privileged of confidentiality,” he said, causing Jackson Lee to explode in anger: “You are obviously here to block any truth,” she said. “He called you to do his dirty work for him! ”
Democrats privately wondered whether Lewandowski’s desire for a Trump endorsement was one of the reasons he was so defiant. At one point, Rep. Eric Swalwell (D-Calif.) tried to get Lewandowski to merely read the section in the Mueller report about him. He still wouldn’t do it, and poked fun at his failed presidential bid, calling him “President Swalwell.”
That’s when the California Democrat suggested that Lewandowski was too “ashamed” to read the report out loud. “I'm not ashamed of anything in my life,” Lewandowski shot back. “Did you have a consciousness of guilt and that's why you can't read them aloud?” Swalwell asked. 
The back-and-forth prompted Nadler to jump in to accuse Lewandowski of obstructing the committee’s work. An angry Cicilline agreed, suggesting the panel should hold Lewandowski in contempt. 
During the few times Lewandowski actually did answer questions, he suggested Trump did nothing wrong. He said he never delivered Trump’s message to Sessions because he went on “vacation” and merely ran out of time — not because he worried Trump’s request was illegal.
At times the hearing was almost comical. When Rep. Hakeem Jeffries (D-N.Y.) asked Lewandowski “Are you the hit man, bag man, the lookout or all of the above?” Lewandowski replied: “I think I’m the good-looking man, actually.” 
Lewandowski also scolded Rep. Jamie Raskin (D-Md.) for saying the tooth fairy was not real: “My children are watching, so thank you for that.”
Republicans, meanwhile, used their time to praise the president and sympathize with Lewandowski because Democrats asked him to testify. 
“Why do Dems continue this charade?” Trump ally Rep. Matt Gaetz (R-Fla.) asked. Lewandowski replied: “I think they hate this president more than they love their country.”
Tuesday’s hearing — titled “Presidential Obstruction of Justice and Abuse of Power” — was also scheduled to include testimony from Rick Dearborn, a former Trump campaign adviser and ex-White House deputy chief of staff, and Rob Porter, a former White House staff secretary.
But Trump has blocked their appearances, claiming they are “absolutely immune from compelled congressional testimony with respect to matters related to their service as senior advisers to the President,” according to a letter sent to Nadler on Monday by White House Counsel Pat Cipollone.
Nadler called the White House’s efforts to restrict testimony “a shocking and dangerous assertion of executive privilege and absolute immunity.”
 Josh Dawsey contributed to this report. 
Read more at PowerPost
politics
Thank You!
 Please enter a valid email address 
You might also like... 
See all newsletters
