Advertisement
Supported by
Mr. Steyer has made the cut for the Democratic presidential debates in October, though he will not be onstage this week. Tulsi Gabbard is also close to securing a spot.
To make the cut, candidates must procure donations from 130,000 people and earn 2 percent support in four qualifying polls. Mr. Steyer fell one poll short of qualifying for the third Democratic debate in Houston this week. But the Democratic National Committee’s rules allow polls to carry over and count toward qualification for the fourth set of debates.
With three qualifying polls already under his belt and the fourth published Sunday, Mr. Steyer has now secured a spot in the debates next month, scheduled for Oct. 15 and possibly Oct. 16, in a location to be announced in Ohio.
“We are thrilled that Tom will be able to share his vision — of how together we can fix our broken political system — with the American public,” his campaign manager, Heather Hargreaves, said in a statement on Sunday.
Only 10 candidates earned enough support to appear in this week’s debate, and they will all appear on a single stage on Thursday night. But with 11 candidates now qualified for the October event, the D.N.C. may split that debate across two nights, as it did for the first two sets of debates in June and July. The committee has not yet indicated whether it will do so. 
There are 20 Democrats running for president. Here’s the latest data to track how the candidates are doing.
The self-help author Marianne Williamson has also crossed the 130,000-donor threshold, but needs three more qualifying polls to earn a spot on the October debate stage. She received 0 percent support in the CBS/YouGov polls of early states, and less than half a percentage point of support in the ABC/Washington Post poll. 
“We’re rewarding celebrity candidates with millions of Twitter followers, billionaires who buy their way onto the debate stage and candidates who have been running for president for years,” he said. “These rules have created exactly the wrong outcomes and they will not help us beat Donald Trump.”
And last week, Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York said that it would be “tough to conceive” of continuing his campaign if he failed to qualify for the Democratic debate in October.
Candidates have until Oct. 1 to meet the donor and polling thresholds to qualify for the debate later in the month. 
Advertisement
