Advertisement
Supported by
Mr. Sanford, the former governor and representative from South Carolina who has become a fierce critic of the president, said he would focus his campaign on fiscal issues.
Former Gov. Mark Sanford of South Carolina said on Sunday that he would challenge President Trump for the Republican presidential nomination, criticizing Mr. Trump’s stewardship of government spending and the global economy and questioning the financial ethics of his administration.
Mr. Sanford said he would mount something of a guerrilla campaign against Mr. Trump, who is overwhelmingly popular with Republican primary voters, according to polls. But Mr. Sanford said in an interview that he believed Mr. Trump’s popularity was “certainly wide but perhaps much thinner and much more fragile than people realize,” and that Republicans should be alarmed by the way women and young people recoil from the president.
“Those people that I dealt with in the Tea Party movement, all those people who just showed up year after year,” Mr. Sanford said, “I believe that those voters are still there and they haven’t been spoken to.”
“I think, legitimately, people raised eyebrows when the vice president stayed 180 miles from a meeting in Ireland, to stay at a Trump facility, and the taxpayer’s on the dime for it,” Mr. Sanford said.
He added, “The idea of people who have business before the federal government coming and just so happening to stay at a facility that’s owned by the president — I don’t think it looks right, I don’t think it sounds right. I think it sets a bad precedent.”
Mr. Sanford said he had called both his fellow insurgents over the weekend, speaking with Mr. Weld and leaving a message for Mr. Walsh. Though the three are nominally competitors, Mr. Sanford said he believed they would benefit from strength in numbers.
“It becomes harder and harder for the president and the party to dismiss a chorus of voices as opposed to one,” Mr. Sanford said.
“If the president’s really at 90 percent, then why in the world would you not want a stomping win in the first-in-the-South primary?” Mr. Sanford said. “You would insist on there being a primary.”
In some respects, Mr. Sanford is the most conventionally qualified challenger of the group, a onetime heartthrob of small-government activist groups who was twice elected chief executive of a politically consequential Southern state. Little more than a decade ago, a Sanford presidential campaign was seen as something close to inevitable, under starkly different conditions than the ones confronting him now.
Who’s in, who’s out and who’s still thinking.
But Mr. Sanford said he would be putting together a plan for reforming some of the most expensive and popular government programs, including entitlement programs like Social Security, and chided Mr. Trump for having dismissed government spending as a political issue.
“This is a president who said we’re not going to touch entitlements and, basically, we don’t have a problem,” Mr. Sanford said.
Mr. Sanford may have the opportunity to model fiscal austerity as a presidential candidate. Like Mr. Trump’s other challengers, he is likely to struggle to raise money, and on Sunday he outlined his thinking about the presidential race on board a bus from Washington to New York.
“It was $350 for a flight. Even the train was jacked up for some reason,” Mr. Sanford said. “It was, like, $30 for the Megabus.”
Mr. Sanford conceded with a chuckle that he did pay for a premium seat.
“It was an extra eight bucks to get the front seat,” he said. “I’m in the front window seat.”
Matt Stevens contributed reporting.
An earlier version of this article misstated the year Bill Weld was a nominee on the Libertarian ticket for president. It was 2016, not 2012.
Advertisement
