Advertisement
Supported by
She had a great June debate and lost steam over the summer. Her surrogates, donors and even some supporters hope that in Houston she can recapture the magic that initially won them over.
Join us for live analysis on debate night. Subscribe to “On Politics,” and we’ll send you a link.


Jess Morales Rocketto, the political director for the National Domestic Workers Alliance who worked on Hillary Clinton’s 2016 campaign, said that, in her view, Ms. Harris represents what the party really wants to be and the debate is a crucial moment for the senator to make that clear.
“Voters and operatives, they want to make her their candidate,” she said. “They haven’t yet because she needs to show some more work to make that happen.” 
Representative Marcia Fudge, an Ohio Democrat who has endorsed Ms. Harris, said she feels confident about her current position. Ms. Fudge expects the California senator to go on the attack in this debate because “the timing is right,” she said. 
“This debate matters in particular because people don’t start paying attention until after Labor Day,” Ms. Fudge said. “Now every day people are starting to pay attention, so this is an important one.” 
For some, Ms. Harris’s up-and-down summer is simply a byproduct of her own success, after an impressive debut and early fund-raising numbers created artificially high expectations she was never going to immediately meet. However, despite Ms. Harris being in the Senate since 2017, her advisers point out that she came into the race without a firm national presence and is the highest-polling Democrat from that position.
“People want to know what makes you tick,” Ms. Fudge said, relaying what she has personally told Ms. Harris. “They want to know what your values are, where you come from. That’s the huge issue.” 
Ian Sams, Ms. Harris’s spokesman, said in a statement that Democrats should expect Ms. Harris to “take on Donald Trump directly” in the debate, and “make the connection between his hatred and division and our inability to get things done for the country.” 
In an interview last week with The New York Times, Ms. Harris appeared unfazed by the fluctuations of the summer or the pressure to have another well-received debate performance.
“Maybe I’ve made it more clear, but I’ve been clear the whole time,” Ms. Harris said of her policy vision. “I’ve always thought and talked about what wakes people up in the middle of the night.” 
Mr. Sanders and Ms. Warren often target Wall Street corporations as the root cause of people’s problems, and Mr. Biden has singled out President Trump as a unique existential threat. When asked what she views as the root cause of societal problems, Ms. Harris said leaders do not see and understand the tangible hardships of working families. 
“It is not about some textbook stuff. It is not some intellectual stuff. It’s not some ideological stuff,” she said. “It literally is, what is that person experiencing?”
“So maybe it’s my life experiences,” Ms. Harris added. “But these aren’t intellectual things for me. ‘What keeps people up at night?’ — those have had a profound impact, a profound effect, on me.” 
Leah Greenberg, the co-executive director of the advocacy group Indivisible, said she still believes Ms. Harris can win over progressive voters, but it would require her embracing the language of systemic reform — which Ms. Harris has rejected in the past. 
“We’ve been really pleased to see her coming forward on climate change and on criminal justice,” Ms. Greenberg said. “But it does feel like she needs to talk about what is the overarching vision that connects those pieces, which are really about significant societal change and structural reform.” 
“People want a sense of political courage,” Ms. Allison said. 
She offered Ms. Harris a succinct pre-debate message: “She better come correct.” 
Advertisement
