Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — Senator Ben Sasse is the rare Republican who has never been shy about criticizing President Trump. An erudite author, professor and former university president with a doctorate in American history from Yale, he once compared Mr. Trump to the white supremacist David Duke.
Now the president has endorsed Mr. Sasse for re-election — a surprise move that rendered the usually outspoken Nebraska senator mum, and demonstrated yet again how much the Republican Party has become the party of Trump.
But his spokesman, James Wegmann, did speak up, saying the endorsement was unsolicited.
“Ben’s grateful for the president’s kind words,” Mr. Wegmann said. “They don’t always see eye to eye, but they’ve built a relationship where they work together when they agree and they wrestle hard when they don’t.”
Solicited or not, the tweet will effectively ensure re-election for Mr. Sasse, 47, who these days is more apt to criticize Mr. Trump’s policies than his personal behavior. He is being challenged in a primary by businessman Matt Innis, who is making the senator’s chilly relationship with the president a central theme of his campaign. The Trump tweet most likely neutralized the primary threat.
“Trump’s endorsement destroyed the anti-Sasse message,” said Jennifer Duffy, who analyzes Senate races for the nonpartisan Cook Political Report, which rates the Nebraska seat “solid Republican.”
For Mr. Trump, there is no downside. He wants to ensure that the Senate remains in Republican hands. And if Mr. Sasse wins his race, the president can do what he likes to do best: take credit.
“I think he believes Ben wants him to be successful,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, a formerly savage critic of Mr. Trump who has more recently become one of his closest friends in the Senate. “He’s been a reliable vote for most things that Trump wants, and personal differences are meaningless to the president, because he’s trying to win. He’s trying to build a coalition.”
In the Senate, where he is prone to long-winded speeches on the Constitution and separation of powers, he has also been known to make appeals to decency and unity, as he did last year during the Supreme Court confirmation hearings of Brett M. Kavanaugh. When Mr. Trump mocked Christine Blasey Ford, who had accused Mr. Kavanaugh of sexually assaulting her when they were teenagers, Mr. Sasse railed against the president in an emotional speech on the Senate floor.
The senator’s critics say that more recently, as his re-election has approached, he has muffled his attacks on the president, noting that he said little about Mr. Trump’s divisive language over the summer, when the nation was reeling from mass shootings in cities like Dayton and El Paso.
When he announced his re-election campaign in August, Mr. Sasse promoted his conservative record and his votes in favor of the president’s “really great judicial nominees.” Local newspapers were quick to note that it was his only mention of the president.
Advertisement
