Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration may begin issuing 50-year “ultralong” bonds next year as the government seeks new ways to finance ballooning deficits and tries to take advantage of low interest rates.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Thursday that he had been studying whether there was sufficient market demand for a 50-year bond, which would overtake the 30-year bond as the longest-term debt that the government issues. Mr. Mnuchin has been considering the possibility since assuming his role in 2017, and his staff has pressed ahead in recent months after a call by President Trump to “refinance” America’s debt.
At the DealBook DC Strategy Forum on Thursday in Washington, Mr. Mnuchin said that he thought a 50-year bond was worth pursuing because of the country’s large debt load and low interest rates.
“We are looking at potentially extending the portfolio,” he said. “If there is proper demand, we will issue 50-year bonds.”
He added that if those bonds were successful, he would also consider the possibility of 100-year bonds.
Interest in the idea of issuing longer-term debt suggests that America’s deficits will not be erased any time soon.
“This would be an acknowledgment that long-term deficits are here to stay,” said Priya Misra, the head of rates strategy at TD Securities.
The United States used to issue debt with longer maturities decades ago, including a 50-year bond that was issued in 1911. The merits of returning to the practice remain a matter of debate among economists and investors alike.
In the current environment of low interest rates, issuing longer-term debt could save taxpayers money in the long run by locking in reduced borrowing costs. The long bonds would also likely appeal to long-term investors such as pension funds and insurers, and they could be used to fund infrastructure projects. However, there are questions about investor appetite for such assets and whether they could prove to be disruptive to markets.
“I told Secretary Mnuchin that this is a great time to refinance our bonds, or some of our bonds,” Mr. Trump said in August.
Mr. Trump, who often fears that the United States is being outdone by other countries, might have taken notice that Britain, Canada and Italy have sold 50-year bonds in recent years, and 100-year debt has been issued in countries like Mexico and Belgium.
As the outlook for global economic growth darkened this year, yields on long-term Treasury debt have tumbled sharply. The yield — the interest rate that investors earn — on the 10-year note fell to 1.46 percent on Sept. 4 from more than 3.20 percent in November 2018. Around the same time, yields on the 30-year Treasury bond dropped below 2 percent for the first time, touching a low of 1.94 percent on Sept. 3, according to data provider FactSet. Even though yields have risen somewhat since, they remain significantly lower than where they were last year.
When bond yields fall, prices rise. So the recent drop in yields suggests strong demand for the longest-maturity debt the Treasury currently issues.
But on Wall Street, there is significant skepticism that enough demand exists among investors like insurance companies and pension funds to justify a long-term commitment to selling 50-year bonds.
Several analysts, when contacted Thursday, pointed to the fact that in 2017, the group that advises the Treasury on market conditions investigated the potential for issuing such long-term debt, and found little evidence of strong or sustainable demand for it among investors.
“I’m personally skeptical that it makes sense now,” said Seth Carpenter, the chief United States economist at UBS, who served as acting assistant secretary for financial markets at the Treasury Department from 2014 to 2016. “But the balance of the argument has shifted pretty dramatically, and it’s gone in the direction of making it more plausible.”
Ultimately, analysts say, the decision to issue ultralong-term debt should not be made because of a short-term move in bond market yields. For decades, the Treasury Department has tried to distance itself from such tactical or opportunistic offerings of debt, instead focusing on maintaining a regular and predictable system of issuing new securities. That system emphasized building the broad buyer base that makes Treasury debt some of the most liquid, or easily traded, financial instruments available.
The depth and liquidity of the market has value to investors, who are willing to pay higher prices — and accept lower yields — in exchange for the ease of trading. That helps lower the government’s borrowing costs. Some market participants say they are concerned that an effort to issue ultralong bonds without sufficient demand could be disruptive.
“It looks like a very opportunistic move that will just probably distort the Treasury curve for the time being and then get terminated, so why bother?” said Ralph Axel, an interest rate strategist at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Disruption in the Treasury market could potentially have broader implications, as a broad range of financial products — such as mortgages, car loans and corporate bonds — are based, in part, on the Treasury market rates.
“The Treasury market is the backbone of fixed income markets globally,” Mr. Axel said. “So you have to treat it with a lot of care.”
Alan Rappeport reported from Washington, and Matt Phillips from New York.
Advertisement
