Advertisement
Supported by
In a clash over their differing plans for Medicare, Julián Castro also told the former vice president: “I’m fulfilling the legacy of Barack Obama and you’re not.”
An initially substantiative exchange over health care policy on Thursday during the Democratic debate quickly devolved into a contentious back and forth between Julián Castro and Joseph R. Biden Jr., with Mr. Castro making a thinly veiled swipe at Mr. Biden’s age. 
“Are you forgetting already what you said just two minutes ago?” Mr. Castro said to Mr. Biden, 76, stating that the former vice president had just contradicted himself on the need for some citizens to buy into his health care plan. 
“If you want Medicare, if you lose the job from your insurance company, from your employer, you automatically can buy into this,” Mr. Biden said earlier. “You don’t have — no pre-existing condition can stop you from buying in. You get covered. Period.”
The first 35 minutes of the debate focused exclusively on health care, but it was the exchange between Mr. Biden and Mr. Castro that grew the most heated. The two former Obama administration officials — Mr. Biden served as the vice president, Mr. Castro as the secretary for housing and urban development — also jostled over who was the better steward of Mr. Obama’s signature health care law. 
“I’m filling the legacy of Barack Obama and you’re not,” Mr. Castro said to Mr. Biden. 
“That will be a surprise to him,” Mr. Biden replied. 
The following is the full exchange:
But that whole time, she had Medicare. I want every single American family to have a strong Medicare plan available. If they choose to hold on to strong, solid private health insurance, I believe they should be able to do that. But the differences between what I support and what you support, Vice President Biden, is that you require them to opt in and I would not require them to opt in, they would automatically be enrolled. They wouldn’t have to buy in. That’s a big difference, because Barack Obama’s vision was not to leave 10 million people uncovered. He wanted every single person in this country covered. My plan would do that. Your plan would not.
CROSS TALK
Advertisement
