Advertisement
Supported by
Our reporters are following all of the exchanges. They will be fact-checking the candidates and providing context and explanation for the policy debates.
Follow along as our reporters analyze tonight’s debate in real time.
Here is how the candidates’ remarks stacked up against the truth.
What the Facts are
WHAT Mr. Castro SAID: 
“I also worked for President Obama, Vice President Biden, and I know that the problem with your plan is that it leaves 10 million people uncovered.”
Mr. Biden wants to expand Obamacare by offering a public option. He says his plan would cover 97 percent of Americans — a figure that Mr. Castro appeared to seize on to justify his statement that the Biden plan would leave 10 million people uncovered. Among them would be undocumented immigrants who would not qualify for the federal subsidies that could help make coverage affordable.
Most people would have to enroll themselves in the public option under Mr. Biden’s plan — leaving the possibility that some will fall through the cracks — but it would automatically enroll millions of low-income people in states that have rejected the option of expanding Medicaid under Obamacare.
What the Facts Are
What MS. Harris Said: 
“And so, I took on the position that allowed me, without asking permission, to create one of the first-in-the-nation initiatives that was a model and became a national model around people who were arrested for drugs and getting them jobs. 
I created one of the first-in-the-nation requirements that a state law enforcement agency would have to wear cameras and keep them on full-time. I created one of the first-in-the-nation trainings for police officers on the issue of racial bias and the need to reform the system.”
What They’re Talking About
What Mr. Biden Said:
 “Nobody should be in jail for a nonviolent crime.”
Those decades-old positions have become an increasing political liability for him in 2019 among progressive Democrats.
WHAT THE FACTS ARE
WHAT Mr. Sanders SAID: 
“You got to defend the fact that 500,000 Americans are going bankrupt. You know why they’re going bankrupt? Because they suffered a terrible disease, cancer, or heart disease.”
Advertisement
