How California got to set its own emissions standards
This latest battle between the Trump administration and California is part of a long-standing partisan conflict involving state and federal government.
Are states, cities and companies taking the lead on climate action?
What the public thinks about this
A part of the sample was then asked: “To what extent do you support or oppose states being able to set their own clean air standards?” A plurality of these respondents (52 percent) supported the states’ ability to set their own standards, while about 23 percent were neutral and 25 percent were opposed.
Another part of the sample read this statement before being asked their views: “For more than 40 years, the federal government has granted California the ability to set its own clean air rules.” Among this group, support for states getting to set their own standard was slightly lower than in the other group (48 percent), although this difference wasn’t statistically meaningful. This suggests that simply citing the long precedent of the California waiver doesn’t change opinion much.
Most respondents also read either an argument favoring states’ rights on clean air standards, an argument against states’ rights, or both. We varied whether this argument was described as a Democratic argument, a Republican argument, or had no party label attached.
For example, the pro-states’-rights argument without a party label read, “Some argue that states should be free to set their own clean air standards because they may face unique challenges with air pollution.” The anti-state argument read, “Others argue that we need a uniform federal standard and should not allow states to fiddle with an issue as important as clean air regulation.”
The impact of these arguments depended a lot on whether people first heard about the precedent of the California waiver. When linked to a neutral source, the anti-states’-rights argument lowered support for states setting their own standards, but only if people didn’t know that the California waiver had been around for decades. Moreover, the pro-states’-rights argument was most effective when combined with information about the California precedent. Among people who had read both statements, support for states’ right to set clean air standards was higher (58 percent).
What about when party labels were attached to these arguments? Interestingly, we did not find the typical pattern of partisan bias, whereby partisans responded to their own party’s cues. In fact, they were more responsive to the argument advanced by the opposite party, as long as it was the argument historically associated with their own party. So Republicans become more supportive of states setting their own clean air standards when exposed to the pro-states’ rights argument advanced by Democrats, and Democrats become more opposed when exposed to the anti-states’ rights argument advanced by Republicans.
What comes next in Trump's fight with California about auto emissions standards
The implications for the Trump vs. California battle
As in 2007, the fight over California’s clean air authority will likely get tied up in federal courts for many months, and it could be rendered moot if Democrats win the presidency in 2020 and grant California’s waiver once again.
Don’t miss anything! Sign up to get TMC’s smart analysis in your inbox, three days a week.
Free daily updates delivered just for you
Free daily updates delivered just for you
