It was the first conversation between the two since that July 25 phone call, in which Trump suggested that Zelensky’s government investigate unfounded allegations of impropriety by former vice president Joe Biden, Trump’s possible political opponent in next year’s general election. Much of the conversation with reporters before the pair’s bilateral meeting, though, focused on the 2016 election and the allegations Trump has made about what happened that year.
Below, we’ve compiled a transcript of their interactions with the news media and added annotations to provide additional context. Clicking highlighted text will offer more information.
We’re with the president of Ukraine, and he’s made me more famous than I’ve been. I will say he’s got a great reputation. He’s very very strongly looking at all sorts of corruption and some of the problems they’ve had over the years. I think it’s one of the primary reasons he got elected. His reputation absolutely sterling.
And it’s an honor to be with you. And we spoke a couple of times, as you probably remember. They’d like to hear every single word, and we give them every single word, and then they say, well, what about today. I think the press would like to stay in the meeting, but we have lots of witnesses if you’d like to have it.
But the country of — our country is doing phenomenally well. We are. We have the best economy we’ve ever had. We have the best employment numbers that we’ve ever had. We have now almost 160 million people working which is more than we’ve ever had. So we’re doing very well in every respect, and I have a feeling that your country is going to do fantastically well. And whatever we can do.
His call with Trump has Washington in turmoil. Who is Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky?
One of the elements that we discussed is the United States helps Ukraine. But I think that other countries should help Ukraine much more than they’re doing. Germany, France, the European Union nations — they really should help you a lot more. And I think maybe together we’ll work on that. They have to feel a little bit guilty about it because they don’t do what they should be doing. You’re very important to the European Union. You’re very important strategically, very important. And I think they should spend a lot more in helping Ukraine, and they know that also, and they actually tell me that, but they don’t seem to produce.
So I’m sure you’ll talk to them, and I’ll certainly be talking to them.
So we are ready. We want to show that we just come and if somebody, if you, you want to help us, so just let’s do business cases. We have many investment cases. We’re ready.
When Biden’s son walks out of China with $1.5 billion in a fund and the biggest funds in the world can’t get money out of China. And he’s there for one quick meeting and then he flies in on Air Force Two. I think that’s a horrible thing. I think it’s a horrible thing but I’m going far beyond that.
I know the president, and I’ve read a lot about Ukraine, I’ve read a lot about a lot of countries, he wants to stop corruption. He was elected I think number one on the basis of stopping corruption, which unfortunately has plagued Ukraine. And if he could do that, he’s doing really the whole world a big favor. I know. And I think he’s going to be successful.
And Rudy Giuliani is a great lawyer. He was a great mayor, he’s highly respected. I’ve watched the passion that he’s had on television over the last few days. I think it’s incredible the way he’s done. What he’s out is he wants to find out where did this Russian witch hunt that you people really helped perpetrate, where did it start? How come it started? It was all nonsense. It was a hoax. It was a total hoax. It was a media hoax and a Democrat hoax. Where did it start? And Rudy’s got every right to go and find out where that started and other people are looking at that, too. Where did it start? The enablers. Where did it all come from? It was out of thin air. And I think he’s got a very strong right to do it. He’s a good lawyer. He knows exactly what he’s doing. And it’s very important.
She gets a subpoena from the United States Congress, and she deletes them. And then she said, as I remember it, that oh, well, they had to do with the wedding and yoga. She does a lot of yoga, right? So they have 33,000 emails about the wedding of her daughter and yoga. I don’t think so. How she got away with that one is just — but it’s one of many. And it’s corrupt government because we have corruption also, Mr. President. We have a lot of corruption in our government. And when you see what happened with Hillary Clinton when you see what happened with Comey and McCabe and all of these people, we have a lot of things going on here, too. Hopefully it’s going to be found out very soon. But I think that a lot of progress has been made. A lot of progress has been made.
I saw this a while ago I looked at, and I said, that’s incredible. I’ve never seen anything like that. Now either he’s dumb or he thought he was in a roomful of really good friends. Or maybe it’s a combination of both in this case.
While we have many more issues to care about and to tackle. We have [unclear]. We have Maidan. We have corruption cases as President Trump rightly mentioned about that. So we know what to do. And we know where to go and what to tackle.
When they look and when you see what’s happening, people are really angry at Democrats. They’re really angry at the Democrat Party, and things like, as an example, drug pricing, getting drugs down, things like gun safety, infrastructure. The Democrats can’t talk about that because they’ve been taken over by a radical group of people. And Nancy Pelosi, as far as I’m concerned, unfortunately she’s no longer the speaker of the House.
Thank you very much, everybody.
Free daily updates delivered just for you
Free daily updates delivered just for you
