Cindy McCain is voicing a dim view of some of the ways the Republican Party is doing business in 2019.
“That’s just not right,” McCain said. “That’s not the party my husband and I belonged to.”
While those issues may have McCain feeling alienated from the party, she predicted they could also have consequences for Republicans in 2020. Speaking about the Arizona GOP, she noted how the party’s exclusionary views, as McCain described them, could fail to resonate with Arizona voters; the state’s demographics increasingly include younger voters, a politically organized — and vocal — Latino population and transplants from around the country.
It was unclear from the interview whether McCain was speaking at times about the broader Republican Party or specifically about the Arizona arm of the GOP. The Washington Post reached out to a representative for McCain seeking clarification but did not immediately receive a response.
“I can see [Arizona] going Democrat, I really can,” McCain said. “I’m not saying I want that, but I can see it happening.”
Her home state, which her husband represented in Congress for more than 35 years, is among a small cluster of reliably red states that could turn blue next year.
Arizona, with its 11 electoral votes, may prove an attractive target for Democrats heading into next year.
In the interview, McCain lamented that much of the political discourse has “degenerated into name calling.” She didn’t linger on President Trump, who feuded with and often insulted the late senator — even after his death in 2018 from glioblastoma, a type of brain cancer. McCain characterized the president and vitriol from the House and Senate as “certainly not helpful.”
“I think we’ve seen the last of men like my husband,” McCain said, “at least for right now.”
Read more: 
‘We got things done’: Biden recalls ‘civility’ with segregationist senators
Perspective: Here’s how political science explains the GOP’s obsession with civility
Trump offered Ukrainian president Justice Dept. help for Biden investigation, memo shows
