A. Pelosi (D-Calif.) is being dragged into something she badly wanted to avoid for fear of making President Trump a martyr and motivating his base for his 2020 reelection bid.
B. She judiciously and wisely withheld her impeachment support until the evidence became super compelling — specifically thanks to new developments involving Ukraine — and she feels now that her party can successfully litigate the case against Trump.
Wherever the truth lies, it’s a momentous decision — and one that carries with it all kinds of unintended consequences that even a smart tactician such as Pelosi can’t possibly foresee. Here are a few things we can say:
First, we should all challenge the conventional wisdom that impeachment will probably help Trump. This prevailing belief stems from Democrats’ surprising success in the 1998 election shortly after Republicans launched their impeachment proceedings against President Bill Clinton.
On the flip side, though, is the unpredictability. Let’s say this is simply an unknown or even a 50-50 proposition — a 50 percent chance it helps Democrats and a 50 percent chance it hurts. Right now, polls suggest that Democrats are favored in 2020, including with Joe Biden leading by as much as double digits nationally and in key states. At the very least, impeachment would seem to add a major variable in an election in which Democrats were starting to look very good.
It all suggests strongly that there are many people in this country who maybe don’t want to see Trump impeached, for political reasons or because they don’t really like the idea, but who do think his actions could warrant exactly that step. It’s not difficult to see them coming around, just as it’s not difficult to see House Democrats who have resisted this idea rallying to the cause now that their leader is committed.
In an ideal world, would Pelosi want to do this? Her past comments suggest not, and the unpredictability of impeachment has to heavily weigh on that decision. There’s also the fact that we’re still awaiting key details on the Ukraine situation — details that could support impeachment or undercut it.
But Pelosi’s impending announcement feels a lot like Democrats crossing the Rubicon. Once they start going down the road of impeachment, it will be difficult to pull it all back, no matter the evidence, because the Democratic base is behind it and doing so might depress base voters.
The next 13 months just got even more interesting.
