Below, some takeaways.
The idea that Trump would proactively release a document that showed him engaging in an explicit quid pro quo with a foreign government was always far-fetched, but it’s worth noting that it’s not there.
But the document indicates Trump made a point, very early in the call, of telling Zelensky how good the United States is to his country.
“I will say that we do a lot for Ukraine,” Trump says. “We spend a lot of effort and a lot of time.”
Then Trump twice tells him the United States had been “very, very good to Ukraine” and suggests Ukraine hadn’t been living up to its end of the bargain.
“The United States has been very, very good to Ukraine, " Trump says. “I wouldn’t say that it’s reciprocal necessarily because things are happening that are not good, but the United States has been very, very good to Ukraine.”
That’s significant because, even in the absence of a quid pro quo, Zelensky might logically have believed aid or some other form of assistance was tied to his decisions. Trump’s comment that the relationship hasn’t been “reciprocal” certainly suggests Ukraine isn’t doing what it should.
“I would like you to do us a favor, though, because our country has been through a lot and Ukraine knows a lot about it,” Trump said, in reference to those investigations.
“Whatever you can do, it’s very important that you do it if that’s possible,” Trump says of CrowdStrike.
Trump soon adds: “The other thing: There’s a lot of talk about Biden’s son, that Biden stopped the prosecution, and a lot of people want to find out about that so whatever you can do with the Attorney General would be great. ... It sounds horrible to me.”
The proximity of Trump talking about these things and his comments about how “very, very good” the United States has been to Ukraine makes it even more suggestive.
Plenty of ink has been spilled about whether Trump engaged in an explicit quid pro quo with Ukraine. And that’s an important question, both because the whistleblower has alleged some type of “promise” and because it might be especially damning for Trump.
It’s difficult to see how Zelensky could interpret that set of circumstances as something other than a strong suggestion and even a veiled threat. It’s equivalent to your boss repeatedly suggesting you do something — while noting what your compensation is — without explicitly making a demand. What are you going to do: believe it to just be a gentle suggestion? No, you’re going to think there could be some relation between your pocketbook/job status and your future actions.
It’s difficult to believe Zelensky couldn’t decode it too.
The rough transcript is not the exoneration Trump claims.
Indeed, the fact that Trump released the call before relenting and handing over the whistleblower complaint to the House Intelligence Committee suggests this piece of evidence is perceived as being better for him than the rest. It could also have been a trial balloon to see how the call was received before making a decision on the full complaint.
Also to keep in mind, the rough transcript is not a verbatim account of the conversation. It is a White House memorandum that is based on the notes and memories of officials in the room. A disclaimer in the rough transcript warns that a number of factors “can affect the accuracy of the record, including poor telecommunications connections and variations in accent.”
The White House’s defense here has centered on the idea that Trump just wanted Ukraine to root out corruption — even as the instances of alleged corruption he focused on were entirely self-serving.
It’s worth noting, though, that Zelensky is actually the first one to bring up corruption, telling Trump, “Well yes, to tell you the truth, we are trying to work hard because we wanted to drain the swamp here in our country.” (Zelensky notably uses Trump’s “drain the swamp” mantra.)
It’s not surprising Zelensky would bring this up, given corruption in Ukraine has been a major concern in the West for years. But the White House has held up the fact that Zelensky broached these matters first, at least in broad terms.
But despite that prosecutor being widely criticized inside Ukraine and elsewhere for being soft on corruption, Trump actually seems to side with him.
“Good because I heard you had a prosecutor who was very good and he was shut down and that’s really unfair,” Trump says. “A lot of people are talking about that, the way they shut your very good prosecutor down and you had some very bad people involved.”
Trump adds later: “I heard the prosecutor was treated very badly and he was a very fair prosecutor so good luck with everything.”
“The former ambassador from the United States, the woman, was bad news and the people she was dealing with in the Ukraine were bad news so I just want to let you know that,” Trump says.
Zelensky then says he appreciated Trump having been the first to warn him about Yovanovitch prior to this call.
Trump responds, perhaps ominously: “Well, she’s going to go through some things."
