Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — The deadly shooting spree in West Texas this weekend — the latest in an especially gruesome summer of massacres — has intensified pressure on congressional Republicans to take up gun safety legislation, giving fresh urgency to a debate that was already expected to be at the top of lawmakers’ agenda when they return to the Capitol next week.
Now it has come roaring back, with Congress set to return on Sept. 9. At a briefing about Hurricane Dorian at Federal Emergency Management Agency headquarters on Sunday, Mr. Trump, who has a record of flip-flopping on gun safety, pledged to find a way to “substantially reduce” mass shootings. But he earlier appeared to dismiss background checks, telling reporters that “they would not have stopped any of it.”
In fact, whether a background check would have prevented the West Texas gunman from acquiring his weapon is not known. Chief Michael Gerke of the Odessa Police Department said the gunman, who had been fired from a trucking job, had used an AR-15-style rifle, but had a criminal record. It was not clear on Sunday whether the gun had been acquired legally, and the authorities stressed that they had not established a motive.
Behind the scenes, in the wake of the El Paso and Dayton shootings, White House officials have been quietly engaged in bipartisan talks with senators who support expanding background checks and so-called red flag laws. The laws make it easier for law enforcement to take guns from people deemed dangerous by a judge who issues a special type of order, called an “extreme risk protection order.”
An administration official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations, said on Sunday that the talks had “made a lot of progress in good faith.” The White House was also exploring other ideas, the official said, including the death penalty for mass shooters and so-called lie-and-try laws to encourage the prosecution of those who lie on background check forms.
“I think there is a sense that the American people just desperately want something to be done, and they have to respond to that imperative,” he said, “but are so far nowhere near crossing the Rubicon to stand up to the gun lobby and the N.R.A. as far as I can tell.”
On Sunday, Senator Rick Scott, Republican of Florida, said the federal government should follow the model set by his home state, which passed a red flag measure after the Parkland massacre.
“We’ve got to figure this out,” Mr. Scott said on the NBC program “Meet the Press.” “We’ve got to figure out how we get guns away from mentally ill people who want to harm others or themselves.”
“Enough is enough,” Speaker Nancy Pelosi said in a statement on Saturday night, adding, “The Republican Senate must end its obstruction and finally pass the common-sense, bipartisan, House-passed gun violence prevention legislation that the country is demanding.”
At the same time, the House appears poised to pass another round of gun safety bills. The House Judiciary Committee is planning to meet next week to take up several gun-related measures, including a red flag bill and a ban on high-capacity magazines like the one used by the gunman in Dayton, which carried 100 rounds. And the panel will convene a hearing on an assault weapons ban this month.
Weapons similar to the AR-15-style model in the West Texas killing were banned from 1994 until 2004 and have been used in most of the deadliest shootings this decade, including at a country music festival in Las Vegas; a church in Sutherland Springs, Tex.; and a nightclub in Orlando, Fla.
The House-passed background checks measure, though, is unlikely to pass the Senate. Opponents object to its provision making virtually all gun sales and transfers, including those between family members, subject to background checks.
Instead, Senate supporters of background checks hope to revive a different measure — the so-called Manchin-Toomey legislation, named for its chief sponsors, Senators Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia, and Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania — which fell to a Senate filibuster in 2013.
In an interview with the Louisville radio host Terry Meiners shortly after the Dayton and El Paso shootings, he stopped short of supporting a background check measure or committing to bring it to a vote, but said simply that the issue would be “front and center” in the Senate debate when lawmakers return.
“We’re going to begin these discussions over the August break,” he said then, “and when we get back, hopefully we’ll be in position to agree on things on a bipartisan basis and go forward and make a law.”
Advertisement
