Advertisement
Supported by
Sidebar
The justices will decide whether an underwater videographer can sue North Carolina for posting his images of the wreckage of a sunken pirate ship.
WASHINGTON — A little more than 300 years ago, the pirate Blackbeard captured a French merchant vessel, renamed it Queen Anne’s Revenge, armed it with 40 cannons and used it to pursue his calling of pillage and plunder. 
“You’re uncovering artifacts that were last touched by Blackbeard’s crew or Blackbeard himself, and it’s been 300 years since anybody has seen them,” Mr. Allen added. “It’s a chance to put your hand on the history.”
The irony of the situation did not escape him, Mr. Allen said. “It’s modern-day piracy,” he said.
The Constitution, the court said, granted states sovereign immunity, shielding them from federal lawsuits. Congress, the court said, was powerless to change that.
Mr. Allen found the ruling baffling. “I can sue another company,” he said. “I can sue another person. I can sue the federal government. But I can’t sue a state for a copyright infringement. That really doesn’t make any sense.”
In dissent, Justice John Paul Stevens wrote that the ruling had taken a wrong turn. “It prevents Congress from providing a federal forum for a broad range of actions against states,” he wrote, “from those sounding in copyright and patent law, to those concerning bankruptcy, environmental law and the regulation of our vast national economy.”
“In my view,” he wrote, “the court’s decision in Seminole Tribe is one of the most objectionable cases that the court decided during my tenure as a justice, both in its reasoning and in the impact of its holding on the efficient functioning of our national government.”
The key words, they said, were “securing” and “exclusive,” neither of which would be honored if states were allowed to violate federal copyrights.
Mr. Allen’s allies emphasized the practical consequences of a ruling against him.
Mr. Allen, for his part, said he was hoping for a favorable ruling in his case, Allen v. Cooper, No. 18-877. “If we succeed,” he said, “an awful lot of artists, musicians, performers, writers and documentarians will have a much better way to protect their intellectual property from copyright infringement.”
Advertisement
