Advertisement
Supported by
Democratic candidates are jockeying for labor support, but union leaders aren’t rushing to endorse. The race is “so fluid,” one said.
PITTSBURGH — Bernie Sanders was in his element — railing against “the billionaire class” — as he talked up his “100-percent pro-union voting record” and his participation in “God knows how many picket lines.”
Though the show of support was mostly symbolic — the union is relatively small and has long been aligned with Mr. Sanders — his campaign’s delighted response underscored just how coveted union endorsements are for many of the 2020 candidates. 
And so for months, candidates have not just rushed to court union leaders; they have also been holding round-table discussions with members, joining picket lines and tweeting in solidarity as they clamber to prove their affinity with workers. 
“Pretty much every candidate is supportive of labor’s issues,” said Eddie Vale, a Democratic strategist who works with labor unions, including the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, or Afscme. “There’s no real advantage to putting all your eggs in one basket when whoever is going to win is going to be good.”
In the meantime, Mr. Vale said, “You’re seeing a lot more opportunities for the membership to interact with the candidates directly.” He added that such opportunities carried benefits for both unions and campaigns: Union leaders can get their members more involved in the process, while candidates get a chance to appeal to workers whose votes are up for grabs.
Mr. Sanders, a longtime labor ally, has leveraged his vast email list to highlight organizing efforts, offer support for union members and even motivate his own supporters to join with striking workers across the country. 
Yet even as candidates trip over each other to score plaudits from organized labor, most of the major unions have stayed on the sidelines, and many union officials say they do not expect their organizations to announce endorsements anytime soon.
The organization has already held seven town-hall-style events with candidates, including Mr. Sanders, Ms. Warren and Mr. Biden, and expects to hold more. Ms. Weingarten said the union wanted to allow members to “see who they feel a connection to.”
“For us, it is not just about who shares your values; it’s not just about who’s electable,” she said. “It is about, do your members feel like they have a real voice in your process?”
“It’s so fluid,” she said about the race. “At this point, it would be disingenuous for me to suggest that there is this magical date when we will know that it’s time.”
“No one knows more than Joe Biden that he’s going to have to work for every vote and every endorsement,” said Pete Kavanaugh, a deputy campaign manager for Mr. Biden. “What makes him unique is that he has a 40-year record of fighting for middle-class and working families and fighting for union members and their members’ families.”
“Warren is a good friend, I talk to her quite a bit,” Mr. Saunders said, praising what he called her “retail politics” skills.
Ms. Warren “is one smart person who also knows how to listen,” Mr. Appelbaum said, adding, “I am concerned about the candidates who have not sought to reach out.”
“I’ve heard more about unions in this race than in all other races combined in recent memory,” he said. “There is no Democratic Party without the labor movement. And I think that at long last, Democratic candidates are waking up to that fact.”
Sydney Ember reported from Pittsburgh, and Thomas Kaplan from Washington. Jonathan Martin contributed reporting from San Francisco, and Noam Scheiber from Milwaukee.
Advertisement
