The senator from Vermont is seeking the Democratic nomination on promises of enacting Medicare-for-all, wiping away student loan debt and aggressively combating climate change, initiatives that together would cost an estimated $48 trillion or more over a decade, a tally of campaign estimates shows.
Sanders has proposed paying for the programs with new taxes on wealthy businesses and individuals, as well as on middle class Americans.
While these ideas have won praise from leading liberal activists and analysts, the notion of new taxes has made some Americans — including prospective Sanders voters — nervous. And some economists warn that the sweeping proposals could pose risks to an already uncertain U.S. economy.
Sanders and his allies acknowledge the high price tag of his ambitious platform. They argue that not acting boldly will exact a larger cost on the country’s well-being in the long run, and that the United States can afford these changes and should feel compelled to act.
“We are in the wealthiest country in the history of the world. We are not a poor country,” Sanders said at a campaign stop in Myrtle Beach, S.C., on Thursday, a refrain he repeats often.
There are many yet-to-be-determined elements of the plan, such as how much it would cost and how it would be paid for. The campaign said Sanders plans to release the proposal in the next month.
“We are introducing legislation that would end all medical debt in this country,” Sanders told reporters here Friday after campaigning at an outdoor festival. “And the bottom line is, it is an insane and cruel system which says to people that they have to go deeply into debt or go bankrupt because of what? Because they came down with cancer or they came down with heart disease or they came down with Alzheimer’s or whatever.”
Cornell University economics professor Steven Kyle said the slate of programs and financing Sanders is pushing would likely boost local and national economies long term. But they also carry some risks.
More than any other issue, health care has been the focus for Sanders in his second White House run. He is an outspoken advocate of a Medicare-for-all system, under which the government would provide health insurance to all Americans in exchange for new taxes.
But at his town hall here Friday, Sanders encountered some skepticism. Scott Lenz, a 57-year-old manufacturing worker, told Sanders that like many people, he gets his health insurance through his employer, which pays most of his premiums. He doubted that he’d be in a stronger position under a new system when that cost shifts from employers to taxpayers.
“I’m not sure I’m going to come out better in that,” Lenz told the senator.
Sanders told him those costs would be “significantly reduced” under his plan and that unionized workers should benefit from employer savings. Lenz, who is from Patrick, S.C., still wasn’t ready to embrace the proposal.
“They’re definitely going to have a savings. I don’t see that translating into any benefit on me, honestly,” he replied.
Marc Goldwein, senior vice president and senior policy director for the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, said that new tax rates on the scale Sanders is proposing could hurt the economy. “There’s nothing inherently wrong about high spending and high taxes,” he said. “But there’s trade-offs involved.”
Sanders’s campaign said his medical debt plan is another way to help Americans deal with the crippling financial effect of health care.
The Sanders campaign has said he would pay for these plans with a Wall Street tax that will bring in $2 trillion over 10 years. Some tax experts have projected lower revenue.
Sanders has also embraced other sweeping ideas such as a federal jobs guarantee and reforming agricultural regulations. One of his main presidential rivals, former vice president Joe Biden, has advanced more modest agenda, setting up a sharp contrast in the contest. Others have also lined up opposite Sanders.
“Folks I talk to don’t want everything for free they want a fair shot,” Montana Gov. Steve Bullock said in Iowa on Saturday.
Jeffrey Sachs, a Columbia University economics professor who advised Sanders in his 2016 run and supports him this time, said achieving ambitious goals on health-care, the environment and other matters are economically feasible.
“Our national income can do all of that,” he wrote in an email, “with a better distribution of income and a better allocation of responsibilities between the public and private sectors. In the end, the budget would be a higher share of GDP, and private consumption of healthcare and education would be much lower.”
