If the stars aligned for them with the right candidate, they were hoping to take out Sen. David Perdue (R) next year on their path to win back the U.S. Senate majority.
Now, they could have a chance at two seats in Georgia. But winning either won’t be easy, and it looks as though they’ll have to do it without their star candidate in Georgia, Stacey Abrams, who reaffirmed Wednesday that she’s not interested in running for Senate.
Isakson is retiring at the end of the year, and Georgia law will set up an election for the seat in 2020. It’s still early to say who’s running, but a Democratic Senate operative called the news “interesting” and describe it as another “potentially competitive Senate race on the map this cycle.”
After much prayer and consultation with my family and doctors, I have made the very tough decision to leave the U.S. Senate at the end of 2019. It has been the honor of a lifetime serving the state of Georgia. This decision pains me greatly but I know it is the right thing to do.
Georgia is part of their equation, but only if they get the right candidates. This is a state President Trump won by five points, after all. So here’s what’s up with Georgia’s two Senate races.
Meanwhile, Democrats picked up a congressional seat outside Atlanta, with Rep. Lucy McBath, and are trying to pick up more next year.
While Abrams got 48.8 percent of the vote in her 2018 governor’s race, Democrat John Barrow got 48.7 percent of the vote in his attempt to be secretary of state. They are two very different candidates, but their similar voter profiles suggest that a number of Democrats not named Stacey Abrams can make Georgia competitive.
Right now former Columbus mayor Teresa Tomlinson and Clarkston Mayor Ted Terry are running for Perdue’s Senate seat. Perdue is easily outraising both (which, of course, comes with being a sitting senator).
The news of Isakson’s retirement is still only hours old, and it’s not clear which other Democrats would run for the seat. The fact that the party doesn’t have someone waiting in the wings suggests its bench is shallow, Republicans say.
Then there’s the fact that Democrats are pinning their hopes for a majority in a state like Georgia in the first place — reflecting the uphill climb they have to win back the Senate next year. Winning the majority requires winning in states Trump won, such as Georgia or Texas, or keeping a Democrat elected in Alabama.
What remains to be seen is how much defending Republicans will need to do in Georgia.
