Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.) on Wednesday denounced hate and publicized an anonymous death threat that she received in which the writer claimed that “a very capable person with a very big ‘Gun’ ” would shoot her at the Minnesota State Fair.
The freshman lawmaker called attention to the threat hours after Alabama Republican Senate candidate Roy Moore urged her to “go back to Somalia.” The Alabama Republican Party has called for her expulsion from the House.
In her tweet, Omar shared an image of the death threat she said she had received. The writer states that “you will not being going back to Washington, your life will end before your ‘Vacation’ ends.” The letter also claims that the congresswoman “won’t die alone” and that “a very capable person with a very big ‘Gun’ ” will target her at the Minnesota State Fair.
“They say we can’t get the Somali Stink out of the clean Minnesota air, but we’re going to enjoy the ad­ven­ture,” the letter reads.
Omar is a naturalized U.S. citizen who was born in Somalia. She has been the subject of frequent attacks by Republicans, including a racist tweet last month in which President Trump said that she and three other congresswomen should “go back” to the “totally broken and crime infested places from which they came.”
Moore is pursuing a 2020 bid against Sen. Doug Jones (D-Ala.). He lost his 2017 race against Jones after more than half a dozen women came forward with decades-old sexual misconduct allegations against him, detailing inappropriate interactions that allegedly occurred when they were teenagers and he was in his 30s. Moore has denied the allegations.
In a fiery tweet Tuesday evening, Omar wrote that she was “elected with 78% of the vote by the people of Minnesota’s 5th District, not the Alabama Republican Party.”
“Sorry, @ALGOPHQ, but this is a representative democracy,” she tweeted, tagging the state GOP’s Twitter account, before skewering the group’s support of 2017 Senate candidate Roy Moore, whom she labeled “an accused child molester.”
 Allyson Chiu contributed to this report. 
