“Question: Do you stand by the statement you made in your SSCI questionnaire that for the previous ten years you had not been involved in any financial or business transactions with any entity controlled by a foreign government? Answer: Yes.” 
“During the past ten years [2006-2016], have you or your spouse received any compensation from, or been involved in any financial or business transactions with a foreign government or an entity controlled by a foreign government?”
Pompeo answered: “No.”
But we wondered: Was there anything else missing? After all, Pompeo had recently spoken about his “small joint venture” in India.
The SSCI questionnaire reached back 10 years. There is a similar question on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee questionnaire, but it only goes back five years, or from 2013 to 2018. Pompeo was a member of Congress from 2011 to 2017, so for the purposes of this inquiry we will examine the accuracy of his answers to the SSCI.
Digging through corporate records and archival websites, it turns out there are three possible cases in which Pompeo could have admitted to engaging in business transactions with a company controlled by a foreign government.
Sentry-Sinopec
When Pompeo was president of international affairs at Sentry International, the company had a major presence in China.
The investment became an issue in Pompeo’s first congressional race, when his opponent accused Pompeo of creating jobs in China, not the United States.
When McClatchy reported on this investment, a CIA spokesman dismissed the report. “Mr. Pompeo was president of an American company in Kansas that sold products made in many different countries, Canada and China to name just two. In fact, the paper clips the company used were from Taiwan,” the spokesman said. “He would have no reason to know details on the layers of companies that may or may not have had ownership interests in each overseas company that supplied products to his Kansas company.”
Shores-Sentry
As far as we can tell, this foreign-government business transaction has not been previously reported and fell within the 10-year window of the SSCI questionnaire.
Hindustan Aeronautics
Still, this business arrangement may have just fallen outside the 10-year window by a few months. Pompeo on his SSCI questionnaire says he was employed at Thayer in 2006, but the New Yorker says “by April of 2006, Pompeo was no longer leading the company.” (The article suggests he was pushed out because of poor management.)
Pompeo signed his SSCI form on Dec. 16, 2016, so as a technical matter, the 10-year window could be deemed to have started Dec. 16, 2006. But in keeping with the spirit of full disclosure, it seems any foreign-government business transactions that took place in 2006 should have been listed.
When we asked the State Department about these foreign-government transactions, we received this statement from a spokesperson:
“This is a recycled story. Before entering public office, Secretary Pompeo successfully ran several great U.S. businesses that sold products with components made in many different countries. He would have no reason to know the details about the layers of companies that may or may not have had ownership interests in the overseas companies that supplied products or components to his Kansas-based businesses—office supplies, computers, tools, valves, pencils, paperclips, you name it. The assertions you make were reviewed during two, intense Senate confirmation processes.”
The interesting thing about the State Department’s response is that as far as we can tell, there was almost no review of these issues, except for a QFR that Pompeo dismissed in a pro forma response. We are puzzled why he would maintain that his answer on the SSCI questionnaire was correct when documents and records with his signature related to Sinopec indicate otherwise.
Meanwhile, there was at least one other business transaction with a foreign government-owned business that was not disclosed to the SSCI — which also means that Pompeo’s response to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee appears incomplete. There’s a reason the Senate asks such queries of potential nominees, and a failure to fully answer such questions should not be so easily dismissed.
