The politicians of Puerto Rico and Florida have been focusing on preparing their residents for a coming tropical storm, but in the face of a looming natural disaster, President Trump’s priority seems to be maintaining rivalries.
Sen. Marco Rubio (R.-Fla.) tweeted Tuesday that his team had been in communication with Puerto Rico’s political leaders about possible next steps — including a call for Trump to declare an emergency, which the president did later that evening.
And Sen. Rick Scott (R-Fla.) tweeted that he had been in communication with Wanda Vázquez Garced, Puerto Rico’s governor.
But the president’s approach to the potential natural disaster was quite different. He did tweet that his team is tracking the storm closely as it heads to Puerto Rico. And Trump expressed confidence that the Federal Emergency Management Agency “will do a great job.” But not without getting in a dig at a political foe. He urged Americans to treat FEMA workers better than he believes San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulín Cruz Soto did.
“Give them a big Thank You — Not like last time,” he tweeted. “That includes from the incompetent Mayor of San Juan!”
We are tracking closely tropical storm Dorian as it heads, as usual, to Puerto Rico. FEMA and all others are ready, and will do a great job. When they do, let them know it, and give them a big Thank You - Not like last time. That includes from the incompetent Mayor of San Juan!
The back-and-forth between Trump and Cruz has been going on since Hurricane Maria, a deadly natural disaster in 2017 that devastated much of Puerto Rico. The liberal mayor criticized the Trump administration’s response to Maria, saying the president did not treat her constituents with the respect they deserved as American citizens.
On Wednesday, she called Trump a serial liar.
Trump has spent the past year defending his administration’s hurricane response in Puerto Rico, which he believes was generous. He has grown increasingly angry about the need for more disaster aid to Puerto Rico — funding he would rather divert to his immigration priorities.
His view of Puerto Rico, Cruz and the territory’s government makes it easy to lean into doing one of the things he does with the greatest of ease: attack critics from the other side of the aisle.
It is well known that Trump thrives on having an opponent. It gives him a place to land his punches — something that his base finds attractive. But focusing on a political rivalry when the lives of thousands of Americans are at risk could come off as petty, undisciplined and, perhaps most important, not winsome — something one would think that a person wanting Americans to keep him in the Oval Office would avoid.
