Advertisement
Supported by
Political memo
Younger candidates are running as agents of generational change, but it is three septuagenarians who have emerged as the front-runners. And age-related attacks have not worked. 
And neither their age, nor Mr. Biden’s sometimes unsteady speaking performance, has convinced voters to get behind other candidates perceived as untested on the national stage.
Some voters have noticed. “I want Joe Biden to be able to complete a sentence better than I can,” said Melanie Gee, 58, a retired antiques dealer who attended a women’s event in Birmingham, Ala., on Monday. “I don’t think he’s senile. I just think he’s not as a sharp as I want him to be.”
Yvette Simpson, the chief executive of Democracy for America, a liberal group, said she worried about Mr. Biden’s ability to “deliver a clear message at a time when a clear message is important to the American people.’’
Mr. Castro took the starkest shot yet at Mr. Biden’s capabilities during a heated exchange over health care policy at the debate. “Are you forgetting already what you said just two minutes ago?” Mr. Castro said, repeating himself three times. It had the effect of thrusting out into the open a fact that has been the subtext of other candidates’ strategies for months.
And Representative Vicente González of Texas defected from supporting Mr. Castro to Mr. Biden, in part because of Mr. Castro’s provocative questions on the debate stage, according to people familiar with his decision.
“If you’re polling in the low single digits and you’re not raising any resources and you’re fracturing your party and you’re just getting your supporters to be upset at other candidates, it certainly can’t be a good thing for our party,” Mr. González said Sunday on CNN, alluding to Mr. Castro’s attack.
At the same time, Mr. Biden’s defenders become protective of him when pressed with questions about his age. Former Senator Barbara Boxer of California, who is neutral in the 2020 primary, said criticisms of Mr. Biden’s age are “ageist.” 
“That is just political attacks, right now people trying to figure out any way to try to knock the front-runner down,” Senator Doug Jones of Alabama said Sunday after attending a church service with Mr. Biden, whom he backs. “Joe’s going to be Joe. And that’s why people love him, and they know his history.”
Black voters, who comprise a critical bloc of Mr. Biden’s support, are not punishing him for his age, said Adrianne Shropshire, the executive director of BlackPAC, a super PAC focused on African-American Democrats. The black primary electorate skews older and is sympathetic to Mr. Biden’s age, she said.
“A lot of the age critique centers on cultural issues, record players and texting, which many of those voters struggle with as well but don’t see as disqualifying,” Ms. Shropshire said.
Mr. Sanders, who is 15 months older than Mr. Biden, and Ms. Warren do not face the degree of scrutiny about their age that Mr. Biden does, even as some voters at their events admit they would like to see someone younger elected president.
Mr. Sanders’s events are high-energy affairs, punctuated by the senator frequently waving his arms to emphasize his points. It also helps that he rarely deviates from themes in his stump speech, affording him far fewer opportunities to make off-the-cuff gaffes.
Still, he lost his voice during a campaign swing through Iowa and Colorado last week — a fact that became evident to millions watching last week’s debate.
“I kind of lost my voice somewhere in Colorado, and I hope I don’t have to go back there right away to find it again,” he joked Saturday in Las Vegas.
Some on the Sanders team have acknowledged privately that his raspiness is not his best look. The Sanders campaign cut short a planned swing through South Carolina on Monday and Tuesday. The campaign said he was “feeling great” but would return home to Vermont to “rest his vocal cords.”
Among the three candidates in their 70s atop the polls, Ms. Warren is the most crisp when speaking to crowds and fielding questions on the debate stage.
“The medical records will be there, and anybody’s welcome to take a look at them,” she said. “And what I’m hoping is, we’re going to get to do a lot more town halls between now and then, and more after that.”
“Age is a figure of speech,” said Harry Reid, the former Senate Democratic leader, who is 79. “I think it’s an exaggeration to start crossing people off the list because they’re 70 years old.”
Katie Glueck and Lisa Lerer contributed reporting from Birmingham, Ala., Sydney Ember contributed reporting from Las Vegas and Thomas Kaplan contributed reporting from Washington.
Advertisement
