Advertisement
Supported by
The Massachusetts senator told a crowd of thousands in New York City that fighting corruption would be central to her presidency. 
Addressing thousands of supporters in Washington Square Park, some holding up “I’m a Warren Democrat” signs, Ms. Warren pressed her case to bring sweeping change to an economic and political system she views as fundamentally tilted to favor the wealthy and powerful. 
“There’s a lot at stake in this election, and I know people are scared,” Ms. Warren said from a lectern in front of the park’s marble arch. “But we can’t choose a candidate we don’t believe in just because we’re too scared to do anything else. And Democrats can’t win if we’re scared and looking backward.”
Ms. Warren was repeatedly met with enthusiastic cheers, and the crowd broke into chants of “two cents” when Ms. Warren laid out her case to impose a 2 percent tax on the fortunes of the super rich. 
The New York City Department of Parks and Recreation said a crowd of 8,000 to 10,000 people was anticipated for Monday’s speech.
But Mr. Trippi cautioned that drawing a large audience in a big city does not necessarily translate to success in the early voting states. “The question is, can you build beyond that core into a more diverse Democratic constituency?” Mr. Trippi asked. “Fifteen thousand people in Seattle does not equal winning South Carolina.”
Asked last week whether she thought crowd size mattered, Ms. Warren replied, “I think it matters getting to talk to lots and lots and lots and lots of people.”
“I believe that we not only have to fight for big ideas in 2020; we’ve got to rebuild our democracy,” she said. “And the way we do that is giving people a reason to get in the fight and coming off the sidelines.”
“The tragic story of the Triangle factory fire is a story about power,” she said. “A story of what happens when the rich and the powerful take control of government and use it to increase their own profits while they stick it to working people. But what happened in the aftermath of the fire is a different story about power — a story about our power, a story about what’s possible when we fight together as one.”
Ms. Warren presented Ms. Perkins — “one very persistent woman,” she called her to cheers — as a template of sorts for how a President Warren could bring about change.
“She used the same model that she and her friends had used after the Triangle Fire: She worked the political system relentlessly from the inside while a sustained movement applied pressure from the outside,” Ms. Warren said, citing legacies like Social Security and the minimum wage.
Advertisement
