Advertisement
Supported by
The Democratic front-runner leads in the polls among African-Americans, and older black voters admire him. But it’s not “locked down,’’ said one party strategist.
At the church on Sunday, there was little evidence that this advantage was sliding. In nearly a dozen interviews, many attendees who are focused primarily on defeating President Trump said that they had not yet firmly committed to a candidate — though Mr. Biden was at the top of most people’s lists with many citing his partnership with Mr. Obama and describing genuine affection for Mr. Biden. No one said that his past remarks on race had changed their views.
“The same ones that are complaining about Biden, they can’t get anything done,” he said of Mr. Biden’s critics who currently serve in Congress.
Many of the black voters and officials in attendance described him as an experienced leader who is well-known, and trusted. 
At Thursday’s debate, when asked about what responsibilities Americans had to account for the legacy of slavery, Mr. Biden offered a rambling answer that included suggesting that social workers can aid parents who “don’t quite know what to do,” an apparent reference to a plank of his education plan. He also advised the use of a “record player” to expose underprivileged children to more words. 
“A lot of us are just shaking our heads, saying it seems to be a disqualifying sentiment,” said Aimee Allison, founder of She the People, a political advocacy group focused on women of color. “At this point in the primary, he does not have an easy and powerful political response to a question like that — it’s got a lot of us just saying, ‘O.K., well, there are other candidates who are seriously contending for our votes.’”
At the debate, Ms. Davis referred to a remark Mr. Biden had made in 1975, when he said, “I’ll be damned if I feel responsible to pay for what happened 300 years ago.” On Sunday, at the church, he struck a sharply different note.
“There can be no realization of the American dream without grappling with the original sin of slavery,” he said.
Throughout his 20-minute address, Mr. Biden was at times booming as he linked slavery, the bombing at the 16th Street church and the rise of white supremacy today to the nation’s centuries-long struggle with racism and oppression. At other times he spoke slowly and emotionally, as he discussed his personal experiences with tragedy. Mr. Biden, who is practiced at delivering eulogies, read prepared text from a black binder, producing a far more fluent speech than he typically delivers on the stump, when he often walks away from Teleprompters.
“Those of us who are white try, but we can never fully, fully understand, no matter how hard we try,” Mr. Biden said. 
That line stayed with Jeffery Lanier Jr., 35, who waved off Mr. Biden’s debate performances and remarks about working with segregationist senators.
“It’s not something he should just use on the campaign trail,” he said. “I can get past it. I see what he’s saying.”
He and his wife, Krystale, 34, both said that they are supporting Mr. Biden, pointing to his experience and his work with Mr. Obama.
She has made strong gains in the first two early-voting states of Iowa and New Hampshire, which are both home to many white liberals. Her challenge is to expand her appeal with voters of color who dominate the later-voting Southern states.
“In the black community we know Biden because he was Obama’s vice president, we know Sanders because he ran the last time, but we’re not familiar with her,” Ms. Daughtry said. “That’s been her biggest challenge.”
Ms. Warren, like many of the other contenders, has been racing to catch up, making a concerted effort to address voters of color through her policy plans, including measures like combating the racial wealth gap. She also attended a dinner with the Congressional Black Caucus Saturday night.
Stanley Greenberg, a veteran Democratic pollster, stressed that Mr. Biden’s standing with the African-American community may be more durable than many expect, saying that he “embodies the Obama legacy.” 
But he also noted that for much of the lead-up to the 2008 election, Hillary Clinton appeared to be the strongest candidate with African-American voters. That changed dramatically after Mr. Obama won Iowa, proving that a black man could win in largely white states.
“That carried over to her until it didn’t,” Mr. Greenberg said.
Like many Democrats, Mr. McGhee, the usher, said he was focused on which Democratic candidate can defeat Mr. Trump.
“It applies to all of them,” he said. “But it does apply to him too.”
 
Advertisement
