Advertisement
Supported by
The progressive group, whose electoral influence has grown since it backed Bernie Sanders four years ago, is now supporting Ms. Warren for the Democratic presidential nomination.
“Senator Warren knows how to kick Wall Street kleptocrats where it hurts, and she’s got some truly visionary plans to make this country work for the many,” said Maurice Mitchell, the Working Families Party’s national director. “We need a mass movement to make her plans a reality, and we’re going to be a part of that work.”
Mr. Mitchell brushed off the possibility that the group’s endorsement would be seen as a sign of a splintering of the progressive left. The vote among “tens of thousands” of party members and national committee leaders resulted in a commanding majority for Ms. Warren, a party spokesman said; she received more than 60 percent of the votes on the first ballot.
But the announcement was met with derision from some of Mr. Sanders’s supporters. The national committee leaders — 56 people — held 50 percent of the voting power, with party members accounting for the other 50 percent. Several Sanders supporters called for the Working Families Party to release the full vote totals, which it has declined to do. 
Mr. Mitchell and other Working Families Party leaders said in interviews that their endorsement came with a message to other progressive organizations. Rather than passively observe the primary, they said, these groups should choose a side and flex their organizing muscle during the early stages to help knock Mr. Biden off his perch.
“If our focus is on victory, we can’t be delusional about it,” Mr. Mitchell said. “You don’t defeat the moderate wing of Democrats through thought pieces or pithy tweets, you defeat their politics through organizing.”
Most national polls show a top tier of three candidates in the Democratic primary — Mr. Biden, Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders — and Mr. Biden has remained the front-runner. 
Among the two leading progressive candidates, Mr. Sanders has traditionally enjoyed more support from working-class voters, helped by his name recognition held over from 2016. Ms. Warren has made significant gains in the last six months, but polling shows that most of that growth has come from college-educated voters. 
Mr. Mitchell took over as national director for the party in 2018, after he rose in prominence during the Black Lives Matter movement born out of protests in Ferguson, Mo.
The group’s leaders stressed that, even with their endorsement, their intention was not to divide the progressive left between Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders. The senators are longtime friends and have been publicly supportive of each other’s candidacies.
But they are still locked in a battle to be the progressive standard-bearer. After the Working Families endorsement was announced on Monday, Misty Rebik, Mr. Sanders’s Iowa state director, wrote on Twitter: “There is one movement politics presidential candidate. One. It’s @BernieSanders.”
But Mr. Mitchell said he believed the Working Families Party could convert Democrats skeptical of wide-reaching progressive policies.
“I’m not worried about converting people who are already committed to a structural change agenda,” Mr. Mitchell said. “I’m worried about the people who are still trying to figure out where they land.”
Thomas Kaplan contributed reporting. 
Advertisement
