Advertisement
Supported by
A Democratic senator expressed concern last year that the F.B.I. was not following up on allegations against the Supreme Court nominee.
WASHINGTON — As the F.B.I. began looking into allegations of sexual assault against Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh during his Supreme Court confirmation hearings last year, a Democratic senator wrote to the director of the bureau saying that he had “information relevant” to the inquiry, but that the F.B.I. apparently failed to follow up.
The letter, sent early last October by Senator Chris Coons, Democrat of Delaware, to Christopher A. Wray, the F.B.I. director, has come to light after a forthcoming book by two New York Times reporters surfaced a new allegation of sexual impropriety by a young Mr. Kavanaugh. 
The revelations have reopened the bitter partisan debate over the confirmation of Justice Kavanaugh, just as he is coming up on his first anniversary on the Supreme Court, and raised fresh questions about how the F.B.I., under the direction of the White House, handled its investigation of the nominee. 
Democrats, then and now, argue that the inquiry was insufficient and geared more toward clearing President Trump’s Supreme Court pick than toward uncovering the truth. Some of them, including several presidential candidates, seized on the new information to call for Justice Kavanaugh’s impeachment, or a new inquiry into the investigation that preceded his confirmation. 
In his missive, Mr. Coons told Mr. Wray that he and his colleagues had heard from several people who wanted to share information about Justice Kavanaugh, but “have had difficulty reaching anybody who will collect their information.”
The F.B.I. inquiry was an extraordinary turn in the nomination of Justice Kavanaugh, who appeared to be on a glide path toward confirmation until Christine Blasey Ford, a California professor, told the Senate Judiciary Committee that he had groped her and pinned her on a bed when the two were teenagers in suburban Maryland. Mr. Trump, under pressure from Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona and a member of the Judiciary Committee whose vote would be crucial to the confirmation, ordered a one-week inquiry.
In his letter to Mr. Wray, Mr. Coons told the F.B.I. director that several people had come to him with additional allegations. In particular, he asked Mr. Wray for “appropriate follow-up” with a former Yale classmate of Justice Kavanaugh’s who had information that might have buttressed a claim by another classmate, Deborah Ramirez. Ms. Ramirez had alleged that Justice Kavanaugh exposed himself to her during a drunken dormitory party in 1983, their freshman year. Justice Kavanaugh has vigorously denied all the allegations against him.
Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, who is one of the leading architects of Mr. Trump’s transformation of the federal judiciary, called the new accusations part of a “deliberate effort to attack judicial independence” by Democrats. 
“There they go again, Mr. President. There they go again,” Mr. McConnell said on the Senate floor. “Senate Democrats reopening the sad and embarrassing chapter they wrote last September. The latest allegation was blasted out by a major newspaper despite the apparent lack of any, any corroborating evidence whatsoever.”
In a copy of Mr. Coons’s letter, obtained by The Times, the name of the classmate with information about Justice Kavanaugh is redacted, but a spokesman for Mr. Coons, Sean Coit, confirmed that it was Max Stier, who runs the Partnership for Public Service, a Washington nonprofit. Mr. Stier, whose résumé includes a stint as one of the lawyers who defended President Bill Clinton during his impeachment, was first identified in the book by Ms. Pogrebin and Ms. Kelly.
“I cannot speak to the relevance or veracity of the information that many of these individuals seek to provide, and I have encouraged them to use the F.B.I. tip portal or contact a regional F.B.I. field office,” Mr. Coons wrote, adding, “However, there is one individual whom I would like to specifically refer to you for appropriate follow-up.”
In their book, Ms. Pogrebin and Ms. Kelly write that Mr. Stier saw Justice Kavanaugh expose himself to another female student at a different alcohol-soaked party, where friends pushed his penis into the woman’s hand. Mr. Stier reported the episode to the F.B.I. and to senators, according to the excerpt published by The Times. Mr. Stier did not respond to requests for comment on Monday.
The F.B.I. acknowledged receiving the letter from Mr. Coons. The two top senators on the Judiciary Committee at the time — Chairman Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, and the top Democrat, Dianne Feinstein of California — were copied on the letter. 
Mr. Grassley insisted in a speech on the Senate floor on Monday that his “office never received anything from Mr. Stier or his unnamed friends, and we never received an allegation against Kavanaugh like the one referenced in the report over the weekend.”
Ms. Feinstein told reporters that “the F.B.I. did not do the investigations that we had hoped they would do,” adding, “We do need to clear this up.”
The authors have not said whether they interviewed Mr. Stier. An early version of the essay failed to note that the female student declined to be interviewed and that friends of hers have said she did not recall the episode. The newspaper later updated the article to include that information, which exposed The Times to sharp criticism from Republicans.
“The New York Times withheld crucial facts that undercut its own reporting,” Mr. Grassley, who presided over the Kavanaugh confirmation hearings, said Monday on the Senate floor. “We now have an uncorroborated accusation, rooted only in unnamed sources with no direct knowledge of the event and that the alleged victim doesn’t even remember.”
Ms. Kelly, speaking on behalf of both reporters, said that while she would “take issue” with Mr. Grassley’s “characterization,” she “can’t get into who our sources were” to protect their confidentiality.
Democrats, though, argued that Mr. Stier’s account echoed the episode that Ms. Ramirez described. 
“There should certainly be a full, fair investigation, as was never done at the time,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut. “It was a sham, as we said then, and there should be a full inquiry now.”
In their book, Ms. Pogrebin and Ms. Kelly recount an episode in which Mr. Coons, deeply frustrated about the scope of the inquiry, called the White House counsel, Donald F. McGahn II, on his cellphone to complain. Mr. McGahn told the senator that the investigation would be conducted “by the book.”
“So I said: ‘Don, thank you, this is great. Send me the book,’” the authors quoted Mr. Coons as saying. In an interview Monday, Mr. Coons said that he felt then, and still feels, that the inquiry was inadequate, adding that it “turned out to be a brief, cramped and narrow additional investigation.”
Despite the calls for Justice Kavanaugh’s impeachment from the left, Democrats in Congress who could investigate and initiate proceedings to try to remove him from the court signaled they were cool to the idea on Monday.
Mr. Nadler, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, told WNYC in New York that he viewed the F.B.I.’s background investigation as a “sham” and said he planned to ask Mr. Wray about it when he appeared for a regular oversight hearing next month. But Mr. Nadler did not promise any additional action before then.
But on Monday, he said, “It’s too early to form a judgment one way or another” about a possible case against Justice Kavanaugh, adding, “Frankly, we are concentrating our resources on whether to impeach the president.”
Advertisement
