Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — The House Oversight and Reform Committee asked Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao on Monday to turn over documents related to communication with her family’s shipping company as the panel stepped up an investigation into whether any actions taken by Ms. Chao amount to a conflict of interest.
The actions by Ms. Chao — including joint public appearances since she became transportation secretary in 2017 with her father, James Chao, who founded the company, and a planned trip to China to meet with government officials there along with her father — have led House investigators to question if she is using her office to try to benefit her family’s financial interests.
The letter to Ms. Chao cites moves by the department to cut specific grant programs intended to help support the United States maritime industry. They include cuts proposed, but rejected by Congress, in 2017 and 2018 for the Maritime Security Program, which subsidizes American-flagged cargo ships so they are available, when necessary, to help the Pentagon move supplies to war zones. Cutting those grants could have undermined the American maritime industry at the same time her family’s company was receiving support from the Chinese maritime industry.
The letter is signed by Representative Elijah E. Cummings, Democrat of Maryland, the committee’s chairman, and Representative Raja Krishnamoorthi, Democrat of Illinois, who is the chairman of the panel’s economic and consumer policy subcommittee.
The Transportation Department, in a statement on Monday, said it intended to respond to the request from House investigators, but suggested that the allegations of any conflict of interest were unjustified.
The agency also pointed out that while it did advocate cuts to certain maritime grant programs, overall it has increased maritime spending, particularly on ships used by maritime academies.
“We look forward to responding to the committee’s request,” the statement said. “Media attacks targeting the secretary’s family are stale and only attempt to undermine her long career of public service.”
The department said in a statement on Monday that the stock Ms. Chao held in Vulcan did not create a conflict of interest and that Ms. Chao’s “decision to divest entirely demonstrates her commitment to going above and beyond what is required in terms of compliance.”
The House Oversight Committee sent Ms. Chao 18 different document and information requests related to the two matters, including requests for copies of any communication since January 2017 between Ms. Chao or any employee at the Transportation Department with her father or her sister Angela Chao, who is now the chief executive of Foremost.
The committee also asked for copies by the end of this month of all documents related to a trip that Ms. Chao planned to take to China in October 2017. The trip was canceled after State Department officials raised ethics concerns about her plan to include members of her family in meetings with Chinese government officials, as was reported in June by The Times.
A spokeswoman for the Oversight Committee said this request to Ms. Chao was the “initial inquiry to Secretary Chao about these specific issues,” suggesting that this is not a matter that the committee has already spent a large amount of time investigating.
Advertisement
