Joe Biden’s fellow candidates have compared him to Donald Trump, dismissed him as past his sell-by date and gone public in unison with concerns about his previous positions on race, abortion and even his physically affectionate campaign style.
There is little evidence that any of it has stuck. Most August polls showed Biden with the support of nearly one in three Democratic voters nationally, far ahead of his nearest presidential opponent and basically unchanged from polling before he announced his campaign.
That resilience has created a challenge for many of the former vice president’s rivals as the summer comes to a close. Their routes to the nomination depend on winning over current Biden supporters, but his staying power has yet to offer a lasting opportunity to chip away.
“Come January, voters are going to give candidates a hard final look and make a decision about who to support,” said Justin Buoen, the campaign manager for Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.). “Between now and then is a lifetime.”
Some candidates, including former housing and urban development secretary Julián Castro, have begun to more explicitly urge Democrats to move out of the safety of the familiar.
“If you take a look at the modern era of presidential campaigns, when Democrats have won, it’s because they’ve taken a bit of a risk, whether it was Kennedy in 1960, or Carter in 1976, or Barack Obama in 2008,” Castro said Sunday on NBC’s “Meet The Press.”
This approach will again be on display at the next debate in Houston on Sept. 12, when Biden will for the first time be confronted by all of his opponents registering in the polls, each of them eager to contrast their visions and styles. For the first time, Sen. Elizabeth Warren (Mass.) will share the center of the stage with Biden after appearing on separate nights over the summer debates and mostly avoiding direct confrontation with him despite a long history of policy disagreement.
It remains unclear, however, whether his rivals will repeat the direct assaults on Biden of the first two contests. At several points since he entered the race in April, such efforts against Biden have rewarded his attackers with attention, fundraising bumps and fleeting polling shifts. But they have also sometimes backfired.
In the first Democratic debate in June, Rep. Eric Swalwell (Calif.) staked his campaign on demanding that Biden “pass the torch” to younger candidates, only to abandon his presidential effort days later. In the last big moment of her campaign, Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand (N.Y.) launched an assault on Biden at the July debate, arguing that a 1981 opinion piece he had written showed disrespect for women who work outside the home. She dropped out last week after failing to qualify for the September debate.
Her advisers remain convinced that the confrontation will help her campaign down the road, though since then she has not made Biden a major part of her message.
“In the first debate, she showed strength and viability,” said Ian Sams, her national press secretary. “And we think that will stick in people’s minds for the rest of the primary.”
Part of the challenge for Biden’s detractors is the historically low appetite among Democrats for intraparty fights.
“Anytime you are in a multi-candidate primary, the aggressor is not the direct beneficiary of an attack,” said Jeff Link, an Iowa Democratic strategist who has worked for the presidential campaigns of Bill Clinton, Al Gore and Obama. “Typically someone else benefits because nobody likes an attack.”
That happened in 2004, when Rep. Dick Gephardt (Mo.) unleashed a blistering attack on Vermont Gov. Howard Dean days before the Iowa caucuses, calling him a “weather-vane Democrat” with “false conviction.” The attack helped sink polling support for Gephardt and Dean, allowing Sen. John F. Kerry (Mass.) to win the state.
He has also warned his rivals that a fiercely negative fight could hurt the party, bringing the discussion back to his central contention that he is best able to defeat President Trump in a general election.
“We shouldn’t be forming a circular firing squad and shooting, because all it does is help Trump,” he said during a meeting last week with black reporters in Washington.
His aides assert Biden’s longtime relationship with Democratic voters has allowed him to survive the attacks. Voters, they say, shrug off his gaffes and new facts about his history because they have watched him for so long in public life.
“When the press or other candidates make a big deal about something he says, they look at it and they roll their eyes,” said John Anzalone, a pollster for the Biden campaign. “Voters know Joe Biden. They have a feel for this guy.”
They also have firmly cast him as the candidate best positioned to defeat Trump, a high priority for most Democratic voters.
“Democratic primary voters just want someone who is going to win, period, and right now he still occupies that space like no one else does,” said Glen Caplin, who served as a senior adviser to Gillibrand’s campaign. “But it’s still early, with a lot of time for that to change.”
Biden’s two closest rivals, Warren and Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), have so far taken different approaches toward him. Sanders has repeatedly tried to use Biden as an establishment foil for his anti-establishment campaign, holding him up as an obstacle to progress.
Warren, by contrast, has taken a far less confrontational approach, not just to Biden but to other Democrats in the race. Like Buttigieg and Castro, who also have focused on generational change, Warren has tried to build a broader thematic contrast with Biden, usually without mentioning his name.
“Some Democrats in Washington believe the only way forward is to make change incrementally, a few tweaks here and some nudges there,” she told Democratic activists at a party meeting in San Francisco on Aug. 22. “No. This is a time of crisis, and when you’re in a crisis — when your back is up against the wall — the last thing you do is back down from the big fights.”
Through the first two sets of debates this summer, Warren and Biden did not appear on the same stage, but that will change in Houston. The moment could burst open an often tense private relationship between the two politicians.
Asked repeatedly in April about her past fights with Biden over a bill overhauling bankruptcy law, which she opposed and he supported, she was hesitant to go into detail about the split but nonetheless previewed the battle to come.
“Look, our disagreement is a matter of public record,” she said. “Joe Biden was on the side of credit card companies.”
