Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — President Trump’s signature campaign promise to build a wall along the southwestern border is far behind schedule. So he has told his aides to get the job done by whatever means necessary, including by seizing land on the Mexican frontier.
Now, as he faces a jittery stock market, battles the Federal Reserve over interest rates and refuses to back down from his trade war with China, Mr. Trump is impatient to showcase a success story to his supporters ahead of the 2020 election.
Inside the White House, the president’s aides say he is doing what he can to deliver on the promise, and quickly. In a statement, Hogan Gidley, a deputy White House spokesman, said that the account amounted to “more false fabrications by people who hate the fact the status quo, that has crippled this country for decades, is finally changing as President Trump is moving quicker than anyone in history to build the wall, secure the border, and enact the very immigration policies the American people voted for.”
“Eminent domain is very interesting,” Mr. Trump said in a speech in January in the Rose Garden. “But without eminent domain, you wouldn’t have any highways, you wouldn’t have any schools, you wouldn’t have any roadways. What we’re doing with eminent domain is, in many cases, we’ll make a deal upfront.”
Opponents of the border wall are taking the president’s promises seriously as new fencing appears in the Sonoran Desert. Kristy Parker, a lawyer with Protect Democracy, a nonprofit, is suing the Trump administration over its emergency declaration to build the wall.
“We keep hearing from him; I think it’s really time to start believing him,” said Ms. Parker, whose nonprofit will argue the case on Thursday in a United States District Court in El Paso. “He has proclaimed repeatedly that he has vast powers that nobody understands, and he can do whatever he wants as the president. I think this is another showing he’s really serious about it.”
But the administration’s claims that a border wall is rapidly appearing are overblown. Despite Mr. Trump’s promising to complete 500 miles of wall in his first term, the Army Corps of Engineers and private contractors have constructed only 60 miles of vehicle barriers or replacement fencing where existing impediments had been damaged, according to a Customs and Border Protection document.
The Trump administration has not constructed any new extension of the barriers, despite the extreme lengths that the president has gone to in hopes of delivering on his signature campaign promise.
The administration began using that funding last week to start work on an additional 124 miles of barriers, according to the Customs and Border Protection document, as well as on a replacement portion of the wall in Arizona, where crews started work on two miles of the Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument. Conservation groups have mounted several legal challenges against the administration, which they have accused of waiving environmental and public health laws to fulfill the president’s promise.
Mr. Jordahl’s negative tone contrasted sharply with a triumphant video tweeted by the president on Wednesday that featured footage of a row of paneled border barriers.
“The Wall is going up very fast despite total Obstruction by Democrats in Congress, and elsewhere!” Mr. Trump wrote.
“Stealing from appropriated funds is always unacceptable, but to pick the pockets of disaster relief funding in order to fund an appalling, inhumane family incarceration plan is staggering,” Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, said in a statement, “and to do so on the eve of hurricane season is stunningly reckless.”
Advertisement
