Advertisement
Supported by
A set of qualifying rules created a few final hours of uncertainty over who would qualify and whether the next debate would be held on one night or two. There was plenty of complaining.
WASHINGTON — The suspense was high. The hour was late. The questions about the next Democratic debate were many: Ten candidates or 11? Two nights or one? One billionaire or none?
And while party officials spent the summer humoring the no-shot candidates who have failed to demonstrate support through fund-raising or polling, patience among some Democrats was running low.
“Voters aren’t even going to know who Steve Bullock is and that we have a governor representing a red state and doing it with strong progressive values,” Ms. Kleeb said. “To me it shows the strength of our party that we have so many people running.”
Even in Iowa, the first-in-the-nation caucus state where Democrats are famous for welcoming almost everyone who shows up and calls themselves a presidential candidate, officials have grown tired of devoting time to those who can’t put up a crooked polling number.
“Iowans aren’t the ones to say, ‘Yeah, you’re done,’” said Bryce Smith, the Democratic Party chairman in Dallas County, in suburban Des Moines. “But people generally want a clearer pathway forward, and that obviously involves fewer people running.”
Candidates on the brink of missing the debate spent this week airing grievances and regrets. In a last-ditch bid to make the debate, Ms. Gillibrand this month bought more than $1 million in ads in New Hampshire and Iowa, hoping to garner enough support to reach the 2 percent polling threshold.
But there were no qualifying polls in those two states after the ads began airing and before Wednesday’s deadline, and Ms. Gillibrand acknowledged that without the exposure of a nationally televised debate, “I just didn’t see our path.”
Then there are Mr. Bullock and Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado. Neither is particularly close to qualifying for additional debates. They are well short in donors, and have not reached 2 percent in a single qualifying poll since February.
Mr. Bullock’s campaign lamented “arbitrary D.N.C. debate rules” and said the forums should have room for the only candidate in the race who won a state President Trump carried in 2016. 
Mr. Bullock, in an interview, pledged to stay in the race through the Iowa caucuses in February whether or not he makes the debates. 
That argument elicits little sympathy at the national committee.
The debate drama is not limited to the fall debates. Aides to candidates who will appear next month in Houston expressed concern about as-yet-unannounced rising thresholds to participate in the party’s November and December debates.
If Mr. Perez again raises the donor threshold, it would force campaigns to redirect money earmarked for early-state organizing toward social media campaigns, in order to drive up donor numbers. Former Representative Beto O’Rourke of Texas, whose fund-raising has dried up after a fast start, emailed supporters Tuesday warning that without more contributions he could be left off the winter debate stage.
While Ms. Gillibrand and others have withdrawn, no top-tier candidate has pulled out — a break from the last two crowded presidential campaigns.
 Tim Pawlenty terminated his 2012 campaign in the Republican primary in August 2011 after losing the Ames Straw Poll to a fellow Minnesotan, Michele Bachmann. Scott Walker quit the 2016 race in September 2015 when his big-spending campaign ran out of money.
“Anyone who isn’t going to be on the debate stage in September when voters are starting to tune in is essentially running a zombie campaign,” said Alex Conant, a Republican strategist who worked for Mr. Pawlenty and then Marco Rubio in 2016. “Voters want to support people on the debate stage. The takeaway from the last couple cycles is that the only thing that matters is debates.”
If nothing else, the downsizing of the September debate week — one overstuffed stage instead of two — has afforded weary Democrats a prospective night off. Even political die-hards had groaned at the specter of a second debate on a Friday evening, viewing it as a kind of municipal homework assignment. 
Shane Goldmacher contributed reporting.
Advertisement
