Advertisement
Supported by
Just 10 presidential candidates managed to qualify for the next debate, which will be three hours long. 
The debate will be held in Houston on Sept. 12, from 8 to 11 p.m. Eastern time, and will be broadcast on ABC and Univision. The moderators will be George Stephanopoulos, David Muir, Linsey Davis and Jorge Ramos.
On Saturday, the D.N.C. said it would hold another debate in Ohio on Oct. 15. If 11 or more candidates end up qualifying — in other words, one more candidate than the current 10 who have qualified — a second debate will be held Oct. 16. The deadline to accumulate qualifying polls and donors to make that debate is 11:59 p.m. on Oct. 1.
From left to right, the candidates will stand as follows, in an order determined by polling averages: Ms. Klobuchar, Mr. Booker, Mr. Buttigieg, Mr. Sanders, Mr. Biden, Ms. Warren, Ms. Harris, Mr. Yang, Mr. O’Rourke and Mr. Castro. Candidates with higher averages are closer to the center of the stage.
Join us for live analysis on debate night. Subscribe to “On Politics,” and we’ll send you a link.


The candidates will have one minute and 15 seconds to answer questions, and 45 seconds for responses and rebuttals. There will be opening statements but no closing statements.
It was about twice as difficult to qualify for this debate as it was for the first two sets of debates, and exactly half as many candidates qualified.
Several candidates who didn’t make the cut this time around criticized the D.N.C.’s requirements, saying the committee was unfairly narrowing the field with five months still to go before the Iowa caucuses.
In a letter sent Wednesday to Tom Perez, the D.N.C. chairman, an adviser to Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado complained that the committee had “not provided information on how or why its unprecedented debate qualification requirements were set nor what the criteria will be for the eight future debates.” 
The D.N.C. is accepting polls from 16 organizations for the debate qualifications, and some highly regarded pollsters are not on the list. Several more candidates, including the billionaire investor Tom Steyer and Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii, might have qualified for the debate if more polls had been counted. But a larger list would not have helped Mr. Bennet or Mr. Bullock, because neither has met the donor requirement.
Some lesser-known candidates have criticized the donor requirement, too, arguing that it creates an incentive to focus on fund-raising rather than voter outreach. It seems, though, that 130,000 donors was actually an easier bar to clear than 2 percent support in four polls. 
Mr. Steyer got three of the four polls he needed, but failed to reach 2 percent support in either of the polls released Wednesday morning. Ms. Gabbard hit that mark in two polls, and Ms. Williamson in one.
Mr. Steyer, Ms. Gabbard and others who didn’t make the cut for September could still qualify for the October debate. (After that, the D.N.C. may raise the qualifications bar yet again.)
So don’t get too excited about the one-night format. The second night will probably be back in October.
Reid J. Epstein contributed reporting.
Advertisement
