Advertisement
Supported by
It’s a moment to connect with a candidate they like. And it’s an act of defiance.
ORANGEBURG, S.C. — A hug can be an act of affection. Of encouragement. Of comfort.
When it comes to hugging Joe Biden, it can also be an act of defiance.
At least, that’s how some of his female supporters see it.
“He’s just so warm,” she continued.
To them, it’s one of many examples of Mr. Biden, 76, appearing out of step with the progressive norms shaping today’s Democratic Party.
“The electorate doesn’t have to settle for someone who doesn’t demonstrate that they see us and are for us, and there are a lot of ways he’s signaled he’s not there,” said Aimee Allison, the founder of She the People, a political advocacy group focused on women of color. Ms. Allison, who has been supportive of Ms. Flores, continued, “It’s nothing to be proud of, that you have women saying, ‘I’m going to go in for a hug!’ That’s not the point. The point is for us all to evolve.”
For Ms. Flores, the question of evolution is key.
“When someone behaves badly, it’s incumbent on them — not us — it’s incumbent on them to change their behavior,” Ms. Flores said in an interview earlier this month. “It doesn’t mean that makes them, necessarily, bad people. The only thing that makes them bad is if they continue the behavior. Joe Biden has demonstrated he’s not very interested in changing his behavior or attitude.”
Mr. Biden’s supporters are keenly aware of that criticism. And they are often eager to loudly dismiss it.
These voters volunteer — sometimes earnestly, sometimes combatively — that they were the ones to request the hugs. They glibly wave off questions about his tactile campaigning style, chalking it up to generational differences, or more often, calling it an asset.
“If you like somebody, you hug them,” said Elizabeth Walek-Sowin, 74, who did just that at a campaign event with Mr. Biden in Henderson, Nevada. “It doesn’t take a Ph.D. to figure that out.”
She proceeded to hug the reporter who had asked about the exchange.
“We’re in a period of time right now where we need hugs,” said Mary McWhorter, 72, after sharing an embrace with Mr. Biden at a campaign stop in Charleston, S.C. “I was thrilled to get to hug Joe Biden. Hell, I’d be happy — he can put his hands on my shoulder any day of the week. I might return the favor, with my husband right here.”
A conversation about hugs often leads to a broader defense of Mr. Biden’s record.
Mr. Biden is back in South Carolina this week for more campaigning — and perhaps, more hugs, in a state his allies consider to be his firewall.
“We can believe Lucy Flores when she says Biden made her feel demeaned and disrespected, while at the same time believing these women who say the same sort of behavior is welcome,” said Rebecca Kirszner Katz, a progressive strategist. 
“In this new era, it’s important for male politicians to recognize that not everyone will be comfortable with candidates being in their personal space,” she added. “When told that your touching is making some women uncomfortable, your defense can’t be, ‘Well, some women are O.K. with it.’”
Ms. Flores, 39, who supported Senator Bernie Sanders in 2016 but has not yet endorsed in the 2020 race, said Mr. Biden’s defenders are missing important nuances of the #MeToo era.
“It doesn’t have to rise to the level of sexual assault or illegal sexual harassment in order for it to be wrong,” she said. “Because it is at the lower end of the spectrum in terms of bad behavior, and women are just now starting to speak out about it, people are of course dismissing it, minimizing the behavior, both women and men.”
“It is incredibly difficult to hold someone accountable for bad behavior when you really, really like them,” Ms. Flores said. “That is the hard part about living our values: it is uncomfortable.”
Patty Krysiak, 66, approached Mr. Biden after a campaign event in Nevada on a recent Saturday, and told him that she was struggling with an incurable blood cancer.
“He said, ‘they got people working on that kind of thing,’” and offered to help connect her doctor with others who are focused on the issue, Ms. Krysiak recalled.
A reporter had earlier observed Mr. Biden hugging Ms. Krysiak and kissing her hand.
“She said she’s a hugger!” Mr. Biden insisted when he caught the reporter watching the exchange.
Ms. Krysiak confirmed that was indeed the case.
“I’m a hugger, not a hand-shaker,” she said. “I know he’s a hugger, too. When he’s allowed to be.”
Advertisement
