The third Democratic presidential debate so far has covered health care, racism, guns and immigration, with candidates touting their records and arguing over how far left the party should go. 
The candidates facing off are former vice president Joe Biden; Sens. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.), Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), Kamala D. Harris (D-Calif.), Cory Booker (D-N.J.) and Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.); South Bend, Ind., Mayor Pete Buttigieg; tech entrepreneur Andrew Yang; former congressman Beto O’Rourke (D-Tex.); and former Obama Cabinet official and former San Antonio mayor Julián Castro.
The conversation made clear the divisions in the party, with Warren and Sanders arguing that Medicare-for-All would save Americans money and Biden, joined by the more moderate candidates, making a case against a wholesale overhaul of the health-care insurance industry as too expensive and . It was part of a broader divide onstage, between candidates who favor less sweeping but more attainable goals and those calling for huge structural change.
Health care is a top concern of voters, and the core of the debate on the topic was among the polling leaders. 
“How are we going to pay for it?” Biden asked, saying his idea of improving the Affordable Care Act was better than Medicare-for-All. “As far as my distinguished friend, the senator on my left (Warren) has not come forward and said how she’s going to pay for it. I lay out how I will pay for it, how I will get it done, and what we will do going forward.” 
Although they attacked Biden, several Democrats openly praised Obama. 
“I want to give credit first to Barack Obama for really bringing us this far,” Warren said. “We would not be here if he had the courage, the talent or the will to see us this far.” 
All the Democratic candidates want to go further than the current system, arguing for the expansion of coverage but disagreeing over whether allowing people to buy in to Medicare and keeping a private insurance system or getting rid of the private industry is the best path. It’s part of a debate over how far left the party should go, and whether a more liberal turn brings in more voters or turns off moderates.
After pointing out that some have advocated eating less meat as a way to combat climate change, Ramos asked Booker, “Should more Americans, including those here in Texas and in Iowa, follow your diet?” 
Booker responded: “You know, first of all, I want to say, no.” Then, in a nod to the occasional linguistic forays that those onstage have made during the debate, he added: “Actually, I want to translate that into Spanish: No.”
Booker then took aim at factory farming before going on to discuss the war in Afghanistan and finally turning to the treatment of veterans — an impressive pivot after a question about veganism and climate change.
But most of those questioned agreed that there shouldn’t be a blank check on troop deployments. 
Warren said she strongly supported bringing troops home from Afghanistan, but thought that military tools were not the only ones the United States should bring to bear. 
“The problems in Afghanistan are not problems that can be solved by a military,” she said. “... We need to work with the rest of the world we need to use our economic tools we need to use our diplomatic tools we need to build with our allies, and we need to make the whole world safer, not keep troops bombing Afghanistan.”
Buttigieg, a veteran who served as an intelligence officer in the Navy reserves, said the United States should not have “an open-ended commitment of ground troops.” 
But it was Buttigieg who landed the most memorable line of the round.
Castro, who remarked in a previous debate that China is the most serious national security threat facing the country, was asked what kind of leverage he would seek to use against Beijing in trade negotiations. He did not directly answer the question but noted — in a departure from Trump’s policy — that he would put a greater emphasis on human rights if elected president. 
Castro also mentioned the Chinese government’s mass detentions of Uighurs, a mostly Muslim Turkic minority in China’s far western Xinjiang region. And he accused Trump of “elevating a dictator” by meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un.
“We need to stop that,” Castro said. “We need to return to ensuring that America leads again on human rights.”
Co-moderator Jorge Ramos asked Biden about the more than 3 million deportations that took place over Obama’s two terms in office. “Why should Latinos trust you?” Ramos asked.
Biden first said it is “outrageous” to compare the records of Trump and Obama on immigration. He then pointed to Obama’s efforts to find a pathway to citizenship for the millions of young people brought to the United States illegally as children. “I’m proud to have served with him,” Biden said, before pivoting to attack Trump’s record and call for the reauthorization of the Violence Against Women Act. 
Ramos pointed out that Biden hadn’t answered the question. “Did you make a mistake with those deportations?” he asked. After Biden responded that Obama did the best he could, Ramos continued to press him: “How about you?”
“I’m the vice president of the United States,” Biden said. 
He soon drew another sharp rejoinder from Castro, who reminded the crowd that he, too, served in the Obama administration. “He wants to take credit for Obama’s work but not have to answer any questions,” he said of Biden.
O’Rourke used to routinely assure owners of assault weapons that he wouldn’t take their guns away if elected. But he said he had a change of heart in August when a gunman opened fire at a Walmart in El Paso and killed 22 people.
“Hell yes, we are going to take away your AR 15, your AK 57,” O’Rourke said. “We’re not going to allow them to be used against your fellow Americans anymore.” 
But while the candidates agreed on the need for stiffer gun control measures, they disagreed on how, exactly, to get those measures passed. 
Biden argued that it was unconstitutional to take guns away from people, and that people who disagree should “speak to constitutional scholars, if in fact we could say, by the way, you can’t own the following weapons period.” 
But Harris criticized him, saying his stance was too gloomy and used an oft-repeated line by Obama: “I would say, Joe, yes we can.” Then she referenced Trump: “Look, obviously he didn’t pull the trigger, but he’s certainly been tweeting out the ammunition.” 
Booker, who has introduced a gun licensing proposal, didn’t directly answer a question about how he would get that proposal passed, even when asked a follow up question. “We get this done by having a more courageous empathy.” Warren said the only way to pass such legislation was to eliminate the legislative filibuster in the Senate that requires at least 60 to get anything done. 
Klobuchar, meanwhile, was asked about criticism that during her years as a prosecutor in Minnesota, she often sided with police in cases of officer-involved shootings of black men. She, too, countered that “that’s not my record,” then pivoted to discuss what she would do as president, including reducing sentences for nonviolent offenders and expanding efforts to allow felons to vote after their release from prison.
Biden, too, was asked to defend his civil rights record – a topic on which he has frequently been criticized by his Democratic opponents. He made a bold declaration — “Nobody should be in jail for a nonviolent crime,” he said — but the fact that Klobuchar and Harris were put on the defensive first seemed to take some of the pressure off the former vice president.
O’Rourke and Castro both spoke of the taint of slavery. But Booker, who is black, said it’s more important to change racist issues baked into American institutions. 
“We have systemic racism that is eroding our nation, from healthcare to the criminal justice system,” he said, touting his proposal for a White House office that would deal with white supremacy. “It’s nice to go back to slavery, but we have more African Americans who are under government supervision today than all the slaves in 1850.” 
Buttigieg spoke of his plan to invest in historically black colleges and universities and in black entrepreneurs. “It’s not enough to just take a racist policy, replace it with a neutral one and expect things to get better on their own.” 
During a back-and-forth over health care, Castro accused Biden, 76, of having had a memory lapse — a not-so-subtle swipe at the former vice president’s age and penchant for gaffes.
“Are you forgetting already what you said two minutes ago?” Castro said.
The sparring didn’t stop there. Biden and Castro — who both served in the Obama administration — went on to do battle over which of them is carrying the torch for the former president.
Castro was blunt. “I’m fulfilling the legacy of Barack Obama, and you’re not,” he said.
Biden, without missing a beat, fired back: “That’d be a surprise to him.”
Some of the other candidates onstage responded with surprise, others with words of caution that Democrats should not be attacking each other so fiercely.
“This is what we’re here for,” Castro replied. “It’s an election.”
The most stinging rebuke of Trump came from Harris, who directly addressed the president as she spoke straight to camera. The only reason Trump hasn’t been indicted, Harris said, is because of long-standing Department of Justice guidance barring charges from being brought against a sitting president.
“And now, President Trump, you can go back to watching Fox News,” Harris said to burst of cheers as she wrapped up her remarks. (The president may watch her remarks — of course, only after he returns from the White House later this evening.)
Sanders and Biden, too, took on Trump in their remarks, as did Klobuchar, who said the president “would rather lie than lead.” But after the debate is over, it is likely Harris’s bold opening statement will be long remembered by those watching at home.
_____________________________________________________________
To qualify, candidates needed to have at least 130,000 individual donors and receive at least 2 percent support in at least four state or national polls. Three candidates were on the cusp — Rep. Tulsi Gabbard (D-Hawaii), author Marianne Williamson and billionaire Tom Steyer — but seven candidates fell well short.
The candidates who met none of the requirements needed to get onto the stage were Sen. Michael F. Bennet (D-Colo.); Montana Gov. Steve Bullock; New York Mayor Bill DeBlasio; former congressman John Delaney of Maryland; Miramar, Fla., Mayor Wayne Messam; Rep. Tim Ryan (D-Ohio); and former congressman Joe Sestak of Pennsylvania.
The qualifications for the debate in October are the same, and more candidates may qualify. Steyer seems to have reached the polling to qualify. Gabbard and Williamson still need additional polls to carry them past the threshold.
The DNC has not yet announced a debate partner or a location for the fourth debate, but it will be held Oct. 15 and, if necessary, Oct. 16, somewhere in Ohio.
