In the third Democratic presidential debate, the candidates tossed out lots of facts and figures, occasionally getting out over their skis. Here’s a selection of some of the claims that caught our attention, written with my colleagues Salvador Rizzo and Meg Kelly. As is our practice, we do not award Pinocchios in debate roundups.
“We didn’t lock people up in cages; we didn’t separate families.”
— Former vice president Joe Biden
The Trump administration also has been criticized for holding migrants in border facilities with cages. Biden was drawing a contrast between the administrations, but he erred when he said cages weren’t used under Obama.
However, Biden is on solid ground when he distinguishes President Trump’s family separation policy from Obama’s. Under its zero-tolerance policy last year, the Trump administration systematically separated migrant families apprehended at the border.
“We have more African Americans under criminal supervision today than all the slaves in 1850.”
— Sen. Cory Booker (D-N.J.)
But that’s not what Booker said.
“Over 90 percent of the American people think we have to get assault weapons off the street — period.”
— Biden
Biden may have been mixing up the statistics for polling on expanding background checks, which does get support in the 90 percent range.
“You’ve got to defend the fact that 500,000 Americans are going bankrupt. You know why they’re going bankrupt? Because they suffered a terrible disease — cancer or heart disease.”
— Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.)
Campaigning for universal health care, Sanders claims 500,000 people go bankrupt every year from medical bills or illness. That’s about two-thirds of the 750,000 total bankruptcies per year.
Sanders’s claim is based on a study published by the American Journal of Public Health in March. The researchers surveyed debtors and asked about factors that contributed to their bankruptcies. Forty-four percent said either medical bills or loss of work related to illness “very much” contributed; 22 percent said either medical bills or illness “somewhat” contributed. Combining both groups of respondents, the study estimated 530,000 bankruptcies a year.
But the study doesn’t establish that all 530,000 bankruptcies were caused by medical bills or illness, as Sanders describes it. The lead researcher behind the study says Sanders’s claim might be on target when measuring only the share of respondents who said medical bills or illness “very much” contributed to their bankruptcies. But those estimates are not in the study itself.
A different study published in the New England Journal of Medicine looked at the same question of medical bankruptcies and found that the rate was far lower: 30,000 to 50,000 a year. However, this study was limited to non-elderly people in California who were admitted to the hospital for non-birth-related reasons, so it covers only a subset of all people facing medical debt.
The research team Sanders cited once included Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.), who contributed to earlier versions of their study when she was a Harvard professor. Interestingly, though, Warren doesn’t appear to make the same claim about 500,000 medical bankruptcies a year.
“We have a Congress that is beholden to the gun industry. And unless we’re willing to address that head on and roll back the filibuster, we’re not going to get anything done on guns. I was in the United States Senate when 54 senators said let’s do background checks, let’s get rid of assault weapons, and with 54 senators, it failed because of the filibuster.”
— Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.)
In 2013, after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, the Senate held separate votes on banning assault weapons and strengthening background checks for gun sales. Warren conflated them.
The bill on background checks got 54 votes, as Warren said during the debate, and fell prey to the filibuster. But the assault weapons ban received 40 votes from Democrats at a time when they held 55 seats in the Senate (counting the independents in their caucus), so the filibuster was not a factor in this case.
“To be clear, Joe, in the United States of America, we are spending twice as much per capita on health care as the Canadians or any other major country on earth.”
— Sanders
“One forecast recently says that it [Trump’s tariff war] has already cost us 300,000 jobs, all right?”
— Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.)
“There is a reason why in the last 45 years, the average American today, despite an explosion of technology and worker productivity, is not making a penny more than he or she made 45 years ago.”
— Sanders
But some analysts say it’s not very useful to compare wages over such a long period. The picture looks better if one takes a different starting point. Wages are up nearly 20 percent since 1996, for instance.
