“I vividly remember when I first heard the news. I was sitting at home watching a major business television show. Early that morning, Jack Welch, the legendary head of General Electric, was about to be interviewed, when all of a sudden they cut away. At first there were different reports. ‘It was a boiler fire,’ but I knew that boilers aren’t at the top of a building. ‘It was a kitchen explosion in Windows on the World.’ Nobody really knew what happened. There was great confusion. I was looking out of a window from a building in Midtown Manhattan directly at the World Trade Center when I saw a second plane at a tremendous speed go into the second tower. It was then that I realized the world was going to change.” 
President Trump has told various versions of this story, of seeing the second jet hit the World Trade Center during the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. He usually says he was in Trump Tower, which is four miles from where the World Trade Center was, though in his most recent remarks, he says he was in “a building in Midtown Manhattan” after apparently being at home (Trump Tower) when the first plane struck.
The first plane, American Airlines Flight 11, hit 1 World Trade Center just before 8:47 a.m.; the second plane hit 2 World Trade Center at 9:03, 16 minutes later.
In his first interview after the attacks, with New Jersey station WWOR, Trump did not mention seeing the second plane. He instead referenced an explosion that he said he saw from his office: “I have a window that looks directly at the World Trade Center and I saw this huge explosion. I was with a group of people. I really couldn’t believe it.”
Rockefeller Center, a few blocks south of Trump Tower, with a clear view of the twin towers, certainly offered a view of the second plane hitting the tower, as can be seen in the video below.
Trump, in 2015, also suggested at a campaign rally that he watched people jump from the buildings: “I have a window in my apartment that specifically was aimed at the World Trade Center because of the beauty of the whole downtown Manhattan. And I watched as people jumped, and I watched the second plane come in.”
Interestingly, in his WWOR interview, Trump says: “I have somebody who was down there who witnessed at least 10 people jumping out of the building from 70 and 80 stories up in the air.” He does not say he personally witnessed people jumping out of the buildings.
So the most likely explanation is that Trump saw the explosion of the second plane and heard about the jumpers, as he recounted in his first interview. But over time, he’s made the story even grander.
As Trump controversies go, whether he saw the second plane or just the explosion of the second plane is relatively minor. Here’s a roundup of Trump claims regarding 9/11 that are clearly false.
“40 Wall Street actually was the second-tallest building in downtown Manhattan, and it was actually, before the World Trade Center, was the tallest — and then, when they built the World Trade Center, it became known as the second tallest. And now it’s the tallest." 
“There was a period during which Trump's was the tallest building in Lower Manhattan, but it wasn't immediately before the construction of the World Trade Center in the 1970s,” Bump wrote. “It was for about two years in the 1930s, well before Trump owned it — or was born.”
“I predicted Osama bin Laden … was coming in to do damage. … In my book, I predicted terrorism. I can feel it, like I can feel good location in real estate.” 
In various speeches and interviews, Trump claimed that two years before the 9/11 attacks, he warned that al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden was a threat — was going to “do damage” to the United States — and even predicted the rise of terrorism.
This is one of Trump’s most notorious claims. An extensive examination of news clips and video archives turned up next to nothing. A professor had conducted extensive research into rumors of such jubilation and said it was possible that maybe six to 12 teenagers had something akin to a celebration on the morning of 9/11 in Paterson, N.J., but they quickly dispersed.
An MTV clip eventually was unearthed — some Trump supporters said it was evidence of the cheering Muslims — and it turned out that a high school senior was quoted as saying she had seen a group of kids acting up in front of the Paterson courthouse, banging on trash cans and shouting. She does not say they were Middle Eastern or Arab.
Trump has often suggested that he was at the center of the cleanup effort, but no evidence has emerged to support that claim. A newspaper report placed him near the scene on Sept. 14, 2001, talking on a cellphone, and a photo of him was taken on Sept. 18 outside the New York Stock Exchange. But an extensive New York Times examination of this claim found no one who could remember him playing any role in the cleanup or even supplying any workers.
Nevertheless, in his comments marking the 18th anniversary, Trump said: “Soon after, I went down to Ground Zero with men who worked for me to try to help in any little way that we could.”
