While most North Carolinians were remembering the lives lost on Sept. 11, 2001, the Republican leaders in the General Assembly took advantage of a half-empty House and voted to override the governor’s budget veto Wednesday morning.
Gov. Roy Cooper (D) said in a news conference that House Republicans called for a “surprise vote” while he and House members were honoring first responders on the anniversary of 9/11.
“Republicans called a deceptive surprise override of my budget veto,” Cooper said. “Unfortunately, it’s the people of North Carolina who lose.”
Republican leaders denied giving any such assurance. The Associated Press reported that the office of Republican Speaker Tim Moore provided audio from Tuesday’s floor session of Lewis saying that recorded votes would happen Wednesday.
Republicans were unable to override the veto for about two months as long as Democrats were present in the chamber, Cooper said. The General Assembly needs a three-fifths majority to override a veto, which Republicans lack.
Rep. Jason Saine (R) made the motion to review the budget shortly before 9 a.m., according to the News & Observer, and Moore dismissed objections from the Democrats present.
The vote went ahead with the members present. The result was a veto override, 55 to 9.
Democrats in the chamber cried foul, and Jackson later said he wants Lewis to recall the veto before it reaches the Senate.
“This is a tragedy. This is a travesty of the process, and you know it,” Rep. Deb Butler (D) yelled before the vote began. “Mr. Speaker, how dare you, Mr. Speaker!”
State Rep. Mary Belk (D) said at a news conference that Moore “kept talking over us. He turned off our mics,” the AP reported.
In a tweet shortly after the vote, Democratic state Sen. Jeff Jackson called Republicans’ behavior “plainly unethical.”
Clarification: An earlier version of this article overly generalized the reason for Democrats’ absence from the General Assembly session. This version has been updated.
Read more: 
Democrats didn’t win in North Carolina’s special election, but here’s why they’re still celebrating
Why Trump cares so much about this special election in North Carolina
Why Democrats’ big gerrymandering win in North Carolina matters
The top five governor’s races of 2019 and 2020
