Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — Lawyers for the former F.B.I. deputy director Andrew G. McCabe, a frequent target of President Trump’s, have asked federal prosecutors whether a secret grand jury refused to indict him, which would be a sign that the government is struggling to make a case against him.
The letter was the latest attempt by Mr. McCabe to stave off charges in the highly unusual and politically charged case. His lawyers have denied that he intentionally lied during an internal inquiry and have said that he is being singled out, noting that similar cases were typically handled administratively, not through criminal prosecution.
Spokeswomen for the Justice Department and the United States attorney for the District of Columbia declined to comment.
A grand jury decision to reject charges is nearly unheard-of.
“Grand juries indict 99.9 percent of people,” said Julie O’Sullivan, a Georgetown University professor of criminal law and a former federal prosecutor. The process is dominated by prosecutors who present evidence, make statements and tell the jury what the law means without a defense lawyer or judge present.
Prosecutors can keep pursuing a grand jury indictment until they prevail, Ms. O’Sullivan said. No “double jeopardy” rule exists preventing them from trying again, the way they cannot recharge defendants for the same offense after a trial jury has acquitted them.
Mr. McCabe’s lawyers argued that prosecutors should set aside the investigation if the grand jury voted against an indictment. The standard for an indictment — a finding of probable cause that a crime was committed — is much lower than for a guilty verdict at a trial, and evidence that falls short of the lower bar would fail to produce a guilty verdict, they said.
“It is simply not reasonable to believe that a trial jury would find Mr. McCabe guilty of any charges employing a far more rigorous and exacting standard — beyond a reasonable doubt,” they wrote.
With a limited set of facts and witnesses, the case promised to be straightforward, but the investigation has taken about 18 months. One prosecutor recently left the case, which would be unusual if an indictment were in the works, people familiar with the case have said. Another left for a private law firm after expressing doubts about the merits of the case, the people said.
One key witness told the grand jury that Mr. McCabe had no motivation to lie. And another could not recall the details of how the leak to the news media unfolded, according to other people familiar with the case. Both of their accounts were critical elements for a prosecution.
Charlie Savage contributed reporting.
Advertisement
