Advertisement
Supported by
Next month, Attorney General William P. Barr will present the Attorney General’s Award for Distinguished Service to those who worked “to support the nomination” of the judge, according to an email reviewed by The New York Times.
That team being awarded includes prosecutors and lawyers from the department’s tax division, the environment and natural resources division, the civil appellate section and several United States attorneys offices.
Lawyers who worked in the office of legal policy, which carries out significant policy initiatives, and in the federal programs branch, which defends the administration in court, were also part of the team.
The Justice Department declined to comment.
Typically, the distinguished service honor, the department’s second highest, is given to employees who worked on significant prosecutions, rather than on judicial nomination processes. In addition to the award to the Kavanaugh nomination team, 10 other distinguished service honors will be presented this year. Those recipients include the prosecutors who worked to end a bid-rigging conspiracy against the Defense Department.
After many years of public service — including work for the independent counsel’s investigation of President Bill Clinton and on the 2000 Florida recount — Justice Kavanaugh had generated a lengthy paper trail that lawyers needed to comb through.
Mr. Rosenstein estimated that he would need about 100 lawyers working around the clock to review all of the documents. His broad request for volunteers from United States attorneys offices was seen by some former officials as a reflection of the huge amount of work required by Justice Kavanaugh’s nomination; others saw it as an unusual insertion of politics into federal law enforcement.
Lawyers in the department’s office of legal policy in Washington had helped with previous Supreme Court nominations.
Four Americans died in the attacks, including the American ambassador to Libya, J. Christopher Stevens.
Advertisement
