Advertisement
Supported by
 
When it comes to diplomatic visits, the president seems to prefer being the guest rather than the host. 
WASHINGTON — When it comes to diplomatic visits, President Trump seems to prefer being the guest rather than the host. 
Since his election in 2016, Mr. Trump has made state visits to South Korea, China, Vietnam, Japan and the United Kingdom. He has dined with the queen of England, touched orbs with the king of Saudi Arabia and met with Pope Francis at the Vatican. 
On Friday, the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, will be the second. 
Mr. Trump is fickle about his foreign allies, but he shares common ground with Mr. Morrison, who became prime minister on a populist platform and won an unlikely election victory, to the shock of his political opponents, but not to Mr. Trump, as he likes to remind the world. 
“He didn’t surprise me,” Mr. Trump said when the two met in June at the Group of 20 summit in Osaka, Japan. “See, I knew him so I said, ‘He’s going to do very well.’ And he did.” 
“We were just talking about the battles that we fought together,” Mr. Trump said in Osaka. “These are big-name battles, and they were tough battles, and we won every one of them.” 
The visit from the Australians is likely to resemble a longer working visit, with the transactional approach Mr. Trump tends to prefer to ceremony.
Aside from the formal state dinner on Friday, Mr. Morrison and his wife, Jenny, will participate in a working meeting with the Trumps before Mr. Morrison is hosted by Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, and Mike Pence, the vice president, at a State Department luncheon. And on Sunday, the two leaders are scheduled to travel together to Ohio to visit an Australian-owned paper factory. 
Anita McBride, who served as the chief of staff to Laura Bush and as the State Department’s White House liaison, said in an interview that hosting Mr. Morrison can show other leaders around the globe that the United States is a reliable partner. 
“It’s a relationship in the Asia theater that is very important,” Ms. McBride said. “There seems to be this question that our allies can’t depend on us, and this is certainly a way to dispel that.” 
The state dinner, which is scheduled to be held in the Rose Garden this year, is also one of the few visible examples of the Trump administration showing an openness to taking cues from its predecessors — even the Democratic ones. 
Advertisement
