Advertisement
Supported by
He led the city through a defining period of growth and tumult for 12 years. But he could ultimately not withstand its demographic transformation.
The cause was cancer, according to a family statement.
Mr. Ferré had been sick for two years, and his treatment forced him to rely first on a walker and then on a wheelchair. But he still showed up at City Hall in recent years, in one instance to oppose a plan to develop a waterfront park that had been renamed in his honor. And he urged local Democrats not to take Latino voters for granted in 2020.
When Mr. Ferré was first elected to city government in 1967, only 3 percent of Miami’s registered voters were Hispanic. By the time he left the mayor’s office, the figure was 40 percent. Hispanic voters now make up 58 percent of the total.
Maurice Antonio Ferré was born on June 23, 1935, in Ponce, P.R., to José Antonio Ferré, a scion of a prominent industrialist family, and Florence (Salichs) Ferré, a homemaker who had moved to Puerto Rico from New York when she was younger. In 1968, Luis A. Ferré, his uncle, was elected governor of Puerto Rico. Mayor Ferré was long a vocal proponent of Puerto Rican statehood. 
The Ferrés made their wealth in ironworks and sugar. Mr. Ferré’s parents sent him to the Lawrenceville School, a boarding school in New Jersey. He was accepted to the University of Pennsylvania to study architecture, but by then his father had bought a house in Miami, on an exclusive stretch of Brickell Avenue, and Mr. Ferré’s mother asked him to come home. He enrolled in the University of Miami and graduated with a degree in architectural engineering in 1957.
Mr. Ferré won a seat in the Florida House of Representatives in 1967. But he quickly jumped to the Miami City Commission, where he proved to be a savvy operator who could cater by turns to the city’s white, black and Hispanic populations.
Mr. Ferré attempted a political comeback three times after leaving office but lost each time — in bids to regain the mayoralty in 1987 and 2001 and to win a United States Senate seat in 2010.
Mr. Ferré remained committed to achieving statehood for Puerto Rico. In 1977, that effort took him to United Nations headquarters in New York, where he delivered a speech accusing the United States of treating the island like a colony. It was an unusually blunt assessment at the time for a Puerto Rican official on the mainland, and his uncle, the former governor, was not thrilled.
Mr. Ferré predicted that the statehood movement would finally find friendly lawmakers in Congress once heavily Latino states like Texas elected Democrats sympathetic to adding a Hispanic-dominant state to the union, perhaps after 2024.
“In the meantime,” Mr. Ferré lamented before he died, “there is no solution for Puerto Rico.”
Advertisement
