Advertisement
Supported by
On politics
Behind the neon-green ruffles, a manifestation of a reality TV presidency.
Perhaps it was inevitable that someone who helped create the first reality TV White House would salsa his way into an actual reality show. 
Clad in a shiny, neon-green ruffled shirt, like a pirate ready to storm a Celine Dion show, the former White House press secretary Sean Spicer shimmied his way through America’s living rooms on Monday night on “Dancing With the Stars.”
But the decision by “Dancing With the Stars” to cast Mr. Spicer is an even more cynical permutation of that strategy: a mainstream brand attempting to make money off the chaos and controversy that has overtaken American political life. 
Mr. Spicer brings the one thing Hollywood craves — attention. 
Nielsen ratings, it’s worth noting, don’t measure whether viewers are hate-watching Mr. Spicer or Hollywood. Eyeballs are eyeballs. 
Debatable, the newsletter bringing you the best from The New York Times’s Opinion section, is tackling a sensitive political question tonight: Should there should be an age limit on the presidency? 
Our colleagues Astead W. Herndon and Sydney Ember provide these updates from the Harris and Sanders campaigns:
Senator Kamala Harris’s campaign announced a new push for political organizers and campaign staff in Iowa on Thursday morning, in what amounts to a risky political and financial bet on the first caucus state.
The announcement, coupled with Ms. Harris’s Iowa-heavy October schedule, is a sign that her struggling campaign is responding to her summer slump in the polls.
On a call with reporters, senior staff members for Ms. Harris characterized the investment as a natural next step. “We saw, certainly, a sugar high after that first debate” in June, said Lily Adams, Ms. Harris’s communications director. “I don’t think any of us thought we would bounce up and stay there for the rest of our lives.”
After Ms. Harris, a Democrat from California, spent much of the summer raising money at a slew of fund-raisers, her advisers said they now hoped to position her for a late-breaking Iowa surge. And they set a firm target: a top-three finish.
“Iowa has a history of breaking late,” said Juan Rodriguez, Ms. Harris’s campaign manager.
The campaign said the moves were an attempt to expand Mr. Sanders’s operations and organize supporters in the Northeast, looking beyond the early New Hampshire primary. But some political watchers took the shake-up as a sign that Mr. Sanders was struggling to maintain support in a state he won in 2016 by more than 20 points.
We are running out of birds. Or at least losing a lot of them. I’m not a scientist, but this does not seem … great. 
Thanks for reading. Politics is more than what goes on inside the White House. On Politics brings you the people, issues and ideas reshaping our world.
Advertisement
