Here are some of the politically notable numbers from the poll:
Here’s a breakdown of political support for key policies, where you can see the country as a whole is very supportive of requiring background checks for all gun buyers (89 percent), red flag laws (86 percent), and a ban on high-capacity magazines (60 percent).
Republicans sensed all of this over the summer. That’s why you have the top congressional Republican, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (Ky.), who is up for reelection next year in a pro-Trump, pro-gun state, saying things such as: “If the president is in favor … and I know that if we pass it, it’ll become law, I’ll put it on the floor.”
So things are changing fast enough for Congress to acknowledge that there should be a debate over stricter gun laws. Are things changing fast enough for Congress to actually pass stricter gun laws this Congress? Skepticism is warranted.
But the side that opposes these laws has traditionally been much more vocal. The National Rifle Association has driven one of the most effective lobbying campaigns against stricter gun laws. Their supporters know to call Congress and know how to vote.
Gun control supporters think they’re catching up; in the past year they’ve held rallies on the Mall and outspent the NRA for the first election cycle.
But this poll suggests there’s still some gap in enthusiasm that favors opponents of gun control. More people feel very or somewhat confident that improving mental health would reduce mass shootings (an NRA talking point) than passing stricter gun laws.
That matches up with what longtime gun-control activists have been seeing: For a wide swath of the country, people who think it’s a good idea to, say, ban high-capacity magazines aren’t generally threatened by what happens if Congress doesn’t do that.
Jim Kessler has studied this issue with the center-left think tank Third Way, which found that people outside of urban areas who aren’t affected daily by gun violence “would be perfectly fine if [a background check law] passed, but it was more a shrug of the shoulders than a shout to the rafters.”
Whether stricter gun laws pass Congress will ultimately come down to how pressured Republicans in the Senate, and President Trump, feel by the public’s support for gun control laws. We can see they do feel political pressure to at least say something, but will it be enough to translate into actually doing something? It will take an overwhelming push, politically, and it’s not clear we’re there.
