Trump himself leaned into this last one over the weekend. He tweeted a video around midnight Saturday that depicted CNN as a cat batting at a laser pointer as he moves it around Trump’s doctored map of Hurricane Dorian in which the storm shows a potential to hit Alabama. The message is unmistakable: He’s a master troll, making the media dance with a carefully crafted distraction.
pic.twitter.com/QeUbwdsWfr
There are a couple of problems with that. The first is that Trump’s own argument implies he’s being deceptive. The second is that treating “Sharpie-gate” as a meaningless distraction completely misses the point.
The thing about trolling is that it’s an inherently dishonest act. You get people to react to what you’re doing by saying something that you don’t really or fully believe. It sounds a lot like Trump is saying that his incorrect tweet warning about severe impacts from Dorian in Alabama was meant to elicit the outrage it received, or that his repeated defenses of the false tweet were meant to drag the story out rather than inform. Why can’t it just be him defending himself against a supposedly false allegation? Why float an ulterior motive for all of this?
But even if we accept that explanation, this is hardly trivial. Even some mainstream journalists have pretended this whole thing isn’t worthy of all of our time or attention. But this was the president providing false information about a dangerous hurricane that was contradicted in real time by the National Weather Service. It’s better that he was overselling the danger for Alabama rather than underselling it, but he was still providing misinformation. What happens if he does that erring in the other direction?
There are very real questions about how all this came to be, including whether the White House applied pressure on a government agency to misleadingly toe his political line. Reporters have quickly submitted FOIA requests for documentation of contacts between the White House and NOAA. We may never find proven wrongdoing, but the whole situation is remarkably suspicious — especially given the White House’s and Trump’s tendency to inject politics into generally nonpolitical government agencies and documented efforts to get them to do pretty much exactly what NOAA just did.
It’s overly reductive to talk about this as if it’s just about an errant tweet Trump sent one weekend in the summer of 2019. It’s about a president who continually misinforms the American people and why and how the government around him participates in that misinformation.
And the president himself practically admitted this weekend that it’s all a big game to him.
