Trump has a pat response to both of those questions: He had nothing to do with either.
A review:
“There’s even one going up now in Nevada. He’s got something about land — that I’m for taking back the land. I have nothing to do with it. He — he will make up stories.” 
“Lyin’ Ted Cruz is now trying to convince people that his problems with The National Enq.were caused by me. I had NOTHING to do with story!” 
“I have nothing to do with the National Enquirer and unlike Lyin’ Ted Cruz I do not surround myself with political hacks and henchman and then pretend total innocence.” 
“I have nothing to do with that.” 
“Every year I have a routine audit. I’m under audit — when the audit’s complete I’ll release them. But zero, I mean I will tell you right now, zero — I have nothing to do with Russia, yes?” 
“I have nothing to do with Russia, John. How many times do I have say that? Are you a smart man? … I have nothing to do with Putin.” 
“We want fairness in the election. This is having nothing to do with me but having to do with the future of our country. We have to have fairness.” 
“My executives will run it with my children. It’s a big company. It’s a great company. But I’m going to have nothing to do with management.” 
“Now, when WikiLeaks, which I had nothing to do with, comes out and happens to give, they’re not giving classified information. They’re giving stuff — what was said at an office about Hillary cheating on the debates.” 
“They’re obstructionists, so I have people, hundreds of people that were trying to get through. I mean you see the backlog, can’t get them through. And then the newspapers will say Trump doesn’t get them through. Well it’s nothing to do with me — statutorily you have to go through this process.” 
“I can tell you one thing. Had nothing to do with us. Had nothing to do with this, and everyone knows it. And by the way, even my enemies on your show said, ‘We haven’t found anything that the Trump campaign did wrong.’ ”
Mueller’s report indicates that Russia hacked the Democrats as part of its effort to influence the 2016 campaign in Trump’s direction, though there was not evidence that Trump’s team was involved in the hacking itself. (Mueller decided against charging anyone with aiding the distribution of the stolen material.)
“I didn’t win because of Russia. Russia had nothing to do with me winning.” 
“Look, all I can say is that I have nothing to do with Russian collusion. Nothing whatsoever.” 
“We did not address ‘collusion,’ which is not a legal term,” Mueller said during his congressional testimony in July. “Rather, we focused on whether the evidence was sufficient to charge any member of the campaign with taking part in a criminal conspiracy. It was not.”
“The New York Times and a third rate reporter named Maggie Haberman, known as a Crooked H flunkie who I don’t speak to and have nothing to do with, are going out of their way to destroy Michael Cohen and his relationship with me in the hope that he will ‘flip.’ ”
By that point, Haberman had already reported on — and interviewed — Trump repeatedly. She’s also a member of the White House press pool.
“I would say probably the big thing is his business and they’re looking at something having to do with his business. I have nothing to do with his business. I can tell you he’s a good guy.” 
There’s no indication that Trump had any connection to Cohen’s side businesses in real estate or taxi cabs — but those were also not the only components of the charges he faced.
“Mr. Cohen, an attorney, received a monthly retainer, not from the campaign and having nothing to do with the campaign, from which he entered into, through reimbursement, a private contract between two parties, known as a nondisclosure agreement, or NDA.” 
“I feel badly about a lot of them, because I think a lot of it is very unfair. I mean, I look at some of them where they go back 12 years. Like Manafort has nothing to do with our campaign.” 
“I’ve always said if you’d go from Election Day five years back, take soybeans. It’s dropped in half. That had nothing to do with me.” 
“You know, the power plant and the power, as I said, was absolutely a disaster for many years. It has nothing to do with President Trump, by the way.” 
“I knew them a long time ago. 15 years ago, 20 years ago. I said, that’s too bad. I’m surprised at them. And then all of a sudden, I see them on television. Nothing to do with me. The next day or day later, they were incensed. They said, Donald Trump is a nice guy.” 
There has been no suggestion that Trump was involved in the women coming forward.
“I had nothing to do with her. So she can lie and she can do whatever she wants to do.” 
“I don’t have money from Saudi Arabia. I have nothing to do with Saudi Arabia. I couldn’t care less.” 
“We do not like seeing what’s going on. Now, as you know, they’re saying we had nothing to do with it. But so far, everyone is saying they had nothing to do with it.” 
“Nothing to do with me.” 
“There was a very — a very interesting problem that they had in New Hampshire. And I can’t tell you about it. It was a very — but it had nothing to do with White House. There was a problem up there. And I won’t go into what the problem was, but you’ll see in about a week or two.” 
“It had nothing to do with President Trump.” 
“I don’t blame Israel for doing what they did. I have nothing to do with it. But I don’t blame them for doing what they did.” 
That decision came after this tweet from Trump.
It would show great weakness if Israel allowed Rep. Omar and Rep.Tlaib to visit. They hate Israel & all Jewish people, & there is nothing that can be said or done to change their minds. Minnesota and Michigan will have a hard time putting them back in office. They are a disgrace!
“They had a mishap. It’s unfortunate. And so, Iran, as you probably know, they were going to set off a big missile, and it didn’t work out too well. It had nothing to do with us.” 
