More importantly, though, we’ve seen how Trump and his administration have attempted to police this nonsensical claim.
Again, the tweet at issue asserted Alabama and states along the Eastern Seaboard would “most likely be hit (much) harder than anticipated” by “one of the largest hurricanes ever.” The claim came after the threat of a direct hit on Alabama had passed and while the only threat was that 1-in-10 shot at a strong breeze.
It was a remarkable enlistment of an objective, science-based agency to the defense of Trump’s false presentation about the risk to Alabama. Having a member of the military, of which the president is commander in chief, step out in Trump’s defense is one thing. Having the scientific agency that makes the hurricane maps do it is another thing entirely.
We can put all of this more simply. Trump made a mistake and, faced with objective analysis showing that he was wrong, attempted to mislead the public on Twitter and by showing a doctored map, asked a senior official to defend his untrue claim and benefited from his commerce secretary putting pressure on the organization that generated the objective analysis.
It’s at moments like this that it’s worth remembering how Trump came to the White House. His background was not in Congress or elected office, where he’d have some familiarity with power-sharing and constituent accountability. His background was, instead, at his eponymous privately held company, where he was accountable to no one but himself. It was the business-world equivalent of a dictatorship, and it was where he spent decades exerting power.
The bizarre fight over Trump’s Alabama tweet, otherwise known as Sharpiegate, reveals how Trump struggles against wielding power under a different type of structure. He wants the government to respond in the way the Trump Organization would have: with complete fealty, however obviously contradictory the product of that fealty might be.
He’s had more luck bringing another institution into line: the Republican Party.
Where did that come from? It came from his concerns about a number of Republicans who have announced primary challenges against him, most recently former South Carolina governor Mark Sanford. Speaking to reporters before traveling to a campaign rally in North Carolina, Trump made the explicit link between his possibly made-up approval number and his concerns about a primary challenger.
“We just got, right — a little while ago, 94 percent popularity or approval rating within the Republican Party,” Trump said. “So, to be honest, I’m not looking to give them any credibility. They have no credibility.” After having said he didn’t know who his possible GOP opponents were, he then disparaged each of the announced challengers in specific terms.
“These are state-level actions with some input from the national party level and the reelection effort,” he wrote. But while past presidents have shut down primaries, this new effort “has been fueled by just how controversial the president is. Trump has fed into that.”
Trump’s public response has been to crack down on the perceived insolence of the scientists rather than to ensure that the public got accurate information. Which, if you think about it, might tell us something about how he ran the Trump Organization, too.
