Advertisement
Supported by
A Renaissance-style tableau for a divided Washington.
It captures a small moment in a big event: The first hearing by the House Judiciary Committee officially called to determine whether to impeach President Trump. But to look at the frame, captured on Tuesday by Doug Mills, a New York Times photographer, is to understand something deeper about the forces at play as the House grapples with the prospect of trying to remove Mr. Trump. 
We decided to give it a close reading.
Doug Mills/The New York Times
At the center of it all
Mr. Nadler, a long-serving progressive from Manhattan, is literally in the middle of the impeachment debate — not just between the Republicans and Democrats seen here, but between competing factions of his own party. Mr. Nadler and most of his fellow Democrats on the committee have become increasingly outspoken about their support for “vindicating the Constitution” through an impeachment vote, but moderates in the party remain deeply skeptical, and Speaker Nancy Pelosi has publicly downplayed the effort.
The photograph documents a tense scene during the panel’s questioning of Corey Lewandowski, Mr. Trump’s former campaign manager, who Democrats believe may hold a key to proving that the president obstructed justice. At issue is whether House rules allow a consultant working for the Democrats to directly question Mr. Lewandowski. 
As Mr. Nadler leans back his chair, an intense debate unfolds around him even after he overruled Republicans’ objection to a prominent defense lawyer questioning Mr. Lewandowski, and then quickly dispatched with their attempts to shut down the hearing.
His broader goal is to try to methodically fight back opposition to build a case for the public that Mr. Trump obstructed justice, abused his power and profited from his office. As he sees it, Tuesday’s hearing, like others before it, may have been chaotic and given the witness a platform to blast Democrats, but it also allowed his committee to demonstrate before rolling television cameras that Mr. Trump had tried to obstruct the special counsel investigation, and is now working to thwart the committee’s own.
hand outstretched
Hunched over, thrusting a small sheaf of papers across the frame, Mr. Collins has initiated this particular fight, grinding the proceedings to a halt. In his hand is a copy of the contract for Barry H. Berke, an experienced white-collar defense lawyer, to serve as a consultant to the committee. Mr. Collins, a fast-talking conservative, is arguing that Mr. Berke is not a full committee employee, and therefore ineligible to question witnesses under the rules. 
In this case, as in most other conflicts Republicans provoke over terms and rules, they want to portray Mr. Nadler and Democrats as running roughshod over congressional norms in a political campaign hellbent on destroying Mr. Trump. If they can help muddle the case Democrats are trying to build, all the better.
“Under the circumstances of the current so-called impeachment inquiry, it would constitute an unprecedented privatization of impeachment,” Mr. Collins said of Mr. Berke’s participation. He added, “If it’s win at all costs, Mr. Chairman, then we have a problem.”
Hand aloft, in a “Cool it” gesture
Ms. Lofgren is a crucial member of the committee’s brain trust. She served as a Democratic staff member for the panel during the impeachment investigation of President Richard M. Nixon and was a member herself when the committee voted to recommend impeaching President Bill Clinton. 
This time, though, she has made no secret of her reservations about Democrats’ case and the wisdom of pursuing an impeachment strictly along partisan lines.
She also serves as the head of the House Administration Committee, and, as such, is stepping in as something of an arbiter to this rules dispute. As far as her committee is concerned, she said, it is well within the rules for Mr. Berke to ask questions.
at mr. nadler’s right hand 
Mr. Berke’s rapid-fire cross-examination of Mr. Lewandowski, when it finally commenced, drew widespread praise and highlighted just how choppy and unproductive the typical questioning by lawmakers in hearings like these can be. Most notably, Mr. Berke was able to force the hearing’s sharp-tongued witness to admit he had been less than truthful about his involvement with the special counsel in national television interviews.
“I have no obligation not to be dishonest to the media because they are as dishonest as anybody else,” Mr. Lewandowski said.
The supporting cast
A very small army of professional staff members stand behind elected officials in any congressional proceeding. In this case, a mix of Democratic and Republican aides who specialize in investigations and committee rules are advising the lawmakers on the finer points of their debate. Pressed against their chests or tightly rolled in their hands are legal papers and procedural documents that undergird the committee’s work. When they aren’t embroiled in mid-hearing flare-ups like this one, they help craft strategy, write speeches, draft scripts for questioning witnesses and attempt to keep the business of the committee on track.
Not pictured (but a looming presence)
Not pictured (but on the witness stand)
Though Mr. Lewandowski is the first fact witness to show up for public testimony before the Judiciary panel, his blockade was part of a larger White House effort to stonewall the committee’s work. It has repeatedly intervened to direct former officials at the center of the case not to testify and slow-walked the production of documents, making it far more difficult for Democrats to create the kind of vivid hearings that could generate more public interest.
Advertisement
