Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — The White House will pull the nomination of Jeffrey Byard to be the head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency after a federal inquiry into a possible barroom altercation involving Mr. Byard prompted concern in Congress and the White House, according to federal officials familiar with the investigation.
While the F.B.I. determined that the allegations facing Mr. Byard were unsubstantiated, the White House is expected to nominate the current acting administrator of FEMA, Peter T. Gaynor, to lead the agency instead. That move is expected before the end of the month, officials said.
The inquiry into the allegation of Mr. Byard’s inappropriate conduct began after the committee held a hearing and voted in June to send his nomination to the full Senate for confirmation.
A spokeswoman for the Department of Homeland Security referred requests for comment to FEMA. A spokeswoman for FEMA said the agency was not permitted to comment on accusations that involved a personal matter that supposedly occurred before Mr. Byard joined the agency two years ago as associate administrator of the Office of Response and Recovery.
The timing of the alleged episode, which officials say took place in a bar, remains unclear.
As a top official at the agency, Mr. Byard has had a direct hand in providing resources to communities hit by hurricanes and wildfires in the United States.
The impending withdrawal of his nomination comes in the middle of an already destructive hurricane season.
A retired Marine, Mr. Gaynor is also overseeing an overhaul of the government-subsidized flood insurance program, which is expected to raise rates on more expensive properties and those in higher-risk areas.
The change is only the latest leadership shake-up at the Department of Homeland Security, responsible for overseeing the country’s borders, immigration policy and addressing domestic terrorism and cybersecurity threats in addition to disaster relief.
Officials leading each agency overseeing immigration or border security — United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Customs and Border Protection — are serving in an acting capacity.
Kevin K. McAleenan, the acting secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, has yet to be nominated.
Advertisement
