Advertisement
Supported by
Attorney General William P. Barr has floated a plan to expand background checks for gun buyers, but President Trump has yet to give it his blessing.
WASHINGTON — As President Trump weighs potential gun safety legislation, his attorney general on Wednesday floated a plan to expand background checks for gun buyers, but the idea was met with skepticism from key Republicans and appeared to face serious obstacles on Capitol Hill.
The White House made clear that the Barr proposal — which senators described as an “ideas list” or a work in progress — has not yet received Mr. Trump’s blessing, further underscoring the degree to which bipartisan talks around gun safety could fail. Mr. Barr, speaking to reporters in the Capitol, also played it down, saying he was “just kicking around some ideas” to see what could gain traction in the Senate.
On Wednesday evening, Mr. Barr sat down with three of the Senate’s strongest advocates of expanded background checks: Senators Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut, and the sponsors of the Manchin-Toomey bill, Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia, and Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania. 
“There’s no question, the heart of the attorney general’s idea is a mechanism for expanding background checks beyond what we have today,” Mr. Toomey said, adding, “I have colleagues who are open to that so I’m modestly encouraged.”
Mr. Manchin also sounded upbeat: “I personally think the president wants to do something. We would not be this engaged for this long a period of time if he didn’t.”
But Republicans who favor gun rights said they wanted more specifics, and several said it was pointless to even talk about Mr. Barr’s plan at this point. As the nation’s chief law enforcement officer, the attorney general will be a central figure in the debate over gun legislation, but senators agree that the president will have the final say.
“My question was: ‘Where is the president on this?’ And I asked this question directly: ‘Is this something the president supports?’ And they didn’t have an answer for that,” said Senator Josh Hawley, Republican of Missouri, who met with Mr. Barr on Tuesday evening. “That’s an important piece. If the president doesn’t support it, then there’s no point.”
And Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, who also met with Mr. Barr on Tuesday evening, warned against any legislation that “raised the specter of confiscation” and said he was not interested in a bill that would “restrict the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding citizens.”
Mr. Cruz is pushing an alternative bill — the so-called lie and try measure, which would make it easier for law enforcement to prosecute people who lie on background checks. That idea is also included in the proposal that Mr. Barr has circulated.
“I wish they would endorse H.R. 8, but that’s not going to happen,” he said, referring to the House bill, adding, “so this is an iterative process.”
Unlike the House bill, the Manchin-Toomey bill would cover only commercial sales, meaning that sales between friends and family members would be exempted. Only two Republicans who voted in favor of it in 2013 — Mr. Toomey and Senator Susan Collins of Maine — remain in the Senate. 
And while some Republican newcomers, notably Senator Mitt Romney of Utah, have said they are inclined to support it, the measure draws opposition from many, like Mr. Hawley, who are concerned that it would lead to a federal registry of gun owners, which gun rights advocates strongly oppose.
Advertisement
