“White House officials promote the summer of 2019 as one of historic achievement for Trump, offering up a list of more than two dozen accomplishments,” Rucker and Parker wrote. “But privately, many of the president’s advisers and outside allies bemoan what they consider to be a period of missed opportunity and self-sabotage.”
The White House communications team did not like this characterization. On Tuesday, it published a video purporting to show The Post what we “missed” over the course of Trump’s “summer of winning.”
(Note that the video echoes Trump’s characterization of this newspaper as the “Amazon Washington Post,” a reference to owner Jeff Bezos, who is also the founder and CEO of the tech company.)
As subscribers are probably aware, The Post did not take the summer off. In fact, we covered each of the major stories included in the video package. It’s just that, outside the White House, those individual accomplishments aren’t really a powerful counterweight to the self-inflicted wounds Trump’s presidency has suffered since the beginning of July. Most of those “wins,” in fact, are either executive orders making incremental changes, achievements that happened before the summer or announced changes that exist in limbo.
Here is each “win,” presented in the order shown in the video, with additional context.
When announcing the change in August, Trump didn’t mention that aspect of the change.
The problem? “Guatemala’s constitutional court,” The Post reported, “has ruled any safe third country agreement would require legislative approval and the proposal has been widely criticized there.”
“We still have some remaining work that has to be done at the working level,” Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan said at the time of Trump’s announcement.
Again, all of this should be weighed against the obvious trouble the White House has faced since summer began: Trump’s racist tweets targeting Democratic elected officials. The warning signs about a recession, powered in part by Trump’s ongoing trade war with China. A dip in his approval rating.
The White House thinks that the actions detailed above outweigh the negatives, proving that Trump “won” all summer long. We’ll leave that assertion up to you to evaluate.
