This whole thing started Sunday morning with a tweet from President Trump about the path of Hurricane Dorian. Six long days later, that tweet has become central to the president’s politics, an emblem of his ongoing war against the media and a source of fundraising for his campaign.
Why Trump thought Alabama was at risk wasn’t clear. He was briefed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency later in the day Sunday after spending a chunk of Saturday playing golf at his private course in Virginia. The idea that Alabama was at risk had faded by then.
Why he continued to insist that his tweet was correct is another question entirely. But on Friday morning, we got one answer, as Trump tweeted an excoriation of the media’s tedious insistence on reflecting reality.
“Check out maps,” he continued, though maps make clear that, at the time of his tweet, Alabama wasn’t at risk.
Then, a transition: This was just another example of the media being out to get him.
It’s hard to overstate the importance of this and similar arguments to Trump’s politics. Trump, according to Trump, is uniquely targeted by the news media, a function of the media’s purported alliance with Trump’s political opponents. The reality, of course, is primarily that Trump is willing to make untrue and misleading claims with far less trepidation than past presidents. Or, really, mayors. Or dog catchers.
This serves him well in two ways: It misrepresents at-times unflattering information for his base of supporters; and it continues to foster the exact argument made above — that he is at war with the media, and vice versa. That sentiment then endears him to his base even more. To the extent that his appeal is rooted in a sense that cultural forces are pushing his supporters away, Trump’s battle with the media is a battle directly against those forces.
There’s a coda to this that was probably predictable from the moment that the media began focusing on Trump’s marker-altered map.
The Alabama fight is now about pitting Trump against the hated cultural elites and making a bit of cash for the campaign at the same time. If you can’t win a debate on the merits, you might as well put it to use in other ways.
