In a head-spinning few days, Republicans have moved into a full offensive posture over the latest allegations against Supreme Court Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh, leaving congressional Democrats in a defensive crouch as they try to change the subject.
Tuesday’s dueling news conferences, led by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) and Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.), perfectly captured the new dynamic.
After their respective policy lunches, McConnell devoted his entire opening remarks, more than three minutes, to the Kavanaugh issue, highlighting a clarification the New York Times added to an article about how an alleged victim did not recall an alleged incident of sexual misconduct during the justice’s college days.
“I think it is truly outrageous. We had this investigation a year ago; we had this vote a year ago,” McConnell told reporters.
That came after McConnell, opening the Senate floor Monday, devoted his entire remarks, more than five minutes, to the Kavanaugh issue with just as much indignation.
Schumer never mentioned the latest Kavanaugh imbroglio in Tuesday’s opening comments and appeared exhausted when the topic came up as the very first question.
“Look, I’ve said this before, very simply. I never thought Kavanaugh should be on the bench, and I still don’t today,” he told reporters.
In Senate floor speeches Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, Schumer covered the waterfront of pending issues: President Trump’s ongoing demands for more money to build a barrier at the border, the overall government funding deadline of Sept. 30, potential gun-control legislation, a federal regulatory review of Chinese telecom firms, election security legislation, climate rules and a presidential nomination.
No Kavanaugh.
Since the first allegations emerged a year ago Monday, in a Washington Post article, the Kavanaugh saga has evolved in a familiar refrain.
Seemingly credible accusations get made; Democrats pounce and demand investigations. Republicans grow quiet, until some other allegation emerges that appears to go too far. Then Republicans go into full umbrage mode, pushing Democrats back until the nominee is confirmed (or, in this week’s case, until Democrats change the subject).
Some Democrats acknowledged that the ground had completely shifted, telling reporters Republicans were enjoying this story.
“Well, they are,” said Sen. Richard J. Durbin (Ill.), the No. 2 Democrat in leadership.
At that moment on Tuesday, a GOP senator was holding the floor and criticizing those Democrats who were calling for Kavanaugh’s impeachment over the issue, including two senators running for the 2020 presidential nomination, Kamala D. Harris (Calif.) and Elizabeth Warren (Mass.).
Durbin lamented that so many jump to impeachment, whether of Trump or other administration officials. It is virtually impossible to get to a two-thirds majority for a conviction in the Senate — which means any impeachment would divert the Democratic-led House’s energy from kitchen-table issues.
“You know, it’s become a knee-jerk reaction among many Democrats that if you’re unhappy with President Trump or some of his appointments, impeachment is a recourse. It’s rare in American history,” the Democratic whip said.
“I just don’t believe that this is what we should be doing at this point. I mean, I voted against the man; I don’t believe he should be on the Supreme Court,” he added.
Senior House Democrats have also tried to sidestep the Kavanaugh matter, although their inquiry into Trump’s 2016 campaign has the potential to turn into its own impeachment process.
“We are concentrating our resources on determining whether to impeach the president,” Rep. Jerrold Nadler (D-N.Y.), chairman of the Judiciary Committee, told a New York radio station Monday.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), asked whether the House needed to look into the new allegation against Kavanaugh, said no.
As a senior member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Durbin had a front-row seat for last September’s epic clash over Kavanaugh. It played out in similar fashion, albeit in a longer, slower process than that of these past few days.
On Sept. 16, 2018, The Post story landed, with Christine Blasey Ford, a professor in Palo Alto who grew up in the Maryland suburbs at the same time as Kavanaugh, accusing him of pinning her to a bed during a high school party and trying to take her clothes off.
Kavanaugh denied the allegation.
Coming on the heels of the #MeToo movement, the claim knocked Republicans back on their heels. They agreed to hold a hearing with Ford and then Kavanaugh to address the issues, but Republicans were afraid to be seen even asking Ford or the nominee about the allegations, so they hired a female Arizona prosecutor to ask the questions.
As the hearing approached, more allegations surfaced against Kavanaugh, most prominently from high-profile attorney Michael Avenatti’s client talking about gang rape parties.
When the hearing unfolded, Ford’s testimony was poised and, to most senators, credible. Midway through questioning of Kavanaugh, Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) started asking his own questions, latching on to the most fantastic allegations and asking the then-federal judge whether he had committed those crimes.
It conflated the stories and made the entire process look bad, which created a conservative rallying cry on behalf of Kavanaugh. He won confirmation, with 50 votes, on Oct. 6.
That clash helped galvanize conservative voters, who helped Republicans flip Senate seats in the red-leaning states of Indiana, Missouri and North Dakota, adding to the GOP majority during a midterm election that was otherwise miserable for Trump’s party.
Now, Democrats fear that this is deja vu, all over again.
Such verification would raise the possibility that the justice lied to the Senate in his hearing last September, a potentially impeachable offense. Harris and Warren called for impeachment hearings.
But the Times article included another allegation of similar behavior that drew most of the attention, until editors posted an update Sunday that included the alleged victim’s failure to recall the incident.
Like Graham a year ago, Republicans jumped on this journalistic mishap to try to destroy the overall content of the book. “I’m distressed by the declining journalistic principles, so much on display,” McConnell said Tuesday.
While Democrats tried to turn the focus back to gun legislation, the GOP leader signaled that he was happy to keep talking about the Supreme Court. In a fundraising appeal for McConnell’s reelection, his campaign on Wednesday offered bumper stickers with the words, “I Stand with Kavanaugh.”
“Make no mistake about it,” McConnell said Tuesday, “Justice Kavanaugh is going to be on the Supreme Court as long as he chooses to serve.”
Here’s a hand-picked list of interesting stories from around The Washington Post. 
In the 1960s, this Florida coast line was a boomtown thriving on the race to the moon. Now, private investment in space travel might bring that back.
In consumer products, the best predictor of whiteness was whether someone owned a pet— followed closely by whether they owned a flashlight. 
Developers are starting to focus on smaller entry-level houses, good news for prospective buyers. But it could also signal a negative outlook on the economy.
powerpost
Thank You!
 Please enter a valid email address 
You might also like... 
See all newsletters
