Advertisement
Supported by
The inspector general, Michael E. Horowitz, faulted Mr. Comey for handing the memos over to his lawyers, one of whom provided the contents of one document to a New York Times reporter at Mr. Comey’s request. Though officials retroactively determined that they contained classified information, prosecutors declined to charge Mr. Comey with illegally disclosing the material.
Mr. Comey has said he helped make the information public in part to bring about the appointment of a special counsel. “Comey violated F.B.I. policy and the requirements of his F.B.I. employment agreement when he chose this path,” the report said.
The White House press secretary, Stephanie Grisham, accused Mr. Comey in a statement of being “a proven liar and leaker,” adding that he “disgraced himself and his office to further a personal political agenda, and this report further confirms that fact.” But the inspector general report found no evidence that Mr. Comey had lied during his interviews or that politics had influenced his efforts to prompt the appointment of a special counsel.
Mr. Comey responded on Thursday by noting that the new report found he had broken no laws and criticizing those who had accused him of lying or leaking information.
The inspector general laid out a litany of problems with Mr. Comey’s actions. In addition to concluding that the memos were F.B.I. property, not his, the report noted that Mr. Comey failed to return them to the F.B.I. after he was fired and improperly disclosed bureau documents and information to his friend and personal lawyer, Daniel C. Richman, and his other lawyers.
At issue in part is who owns the information in the memos: Mr. Comey or the F.B.I. While Mr. Comey said he believed that two of his memos were his personal documents, all of the senior leaders interviewed by the inspector general disagreed, believing they were the property of the F.B.I.
The inspector general acknowledged that Mr. Comey did not leak any classified information to the news media. But Mr. Richman, not Mr. Comey, told the F.B.I. that the other lawyers, David Kelley and Patrick Fitzgerald, also possessed memos; Mr. Comey never told the F.B.I. that he had shared four memos with his lawyers, according to the report.
Mr. Comey has said he would not do anything differently if faced with the same set of choices. Rod J. Rosenstein, the former deputy attorney general, has said that Mr. Comey’s intransigence was partly why he backed firing him in 2017.
Mr. Comey kept four memos inside a safe at his home and shared details about one with Mr. Richman, who told a Times reporter about its contents. Mr. Comey later sent some of the memos to Mr. Richman and his other lawyers, and the F.B.I. eventually deleted the memos from their computer systems.
Inside the F.B.I., members of Mr. Comey’s inner circle were forced to deal with the fallout from Mr. Comey’s revelations, the inspector general found, even as they confronted the investigations into Mr. Trump, which themselves had outsize political implications. Officials were so concerned by the events that one of them claimed whistle-blower status and provided the inspector general with the memos shortly after Mr. Comey was fired.
Former aides to Mr. Comey, including the former F.B.I. lawyers Lisa Page and James A. Baker, along with the senior agent Peter Strzok, were assigned to examine the seven memos to determine whether they contained classified information. The found that four of the memos had small amounts of classified details, and the others were designated as unclassified but “for official use only.”
The team classified two of the documents as confidential to protect the president’s ability to conduct foreign relations, the report said. One of the memos described statements by the president that had the potential to harm “the diplomatic relations of the United States; the foreign relations of the United States, by disclosing the president’s mental view of a foreign leader,” Mr. Baker told the inspector general.
Mr. Comey told the inspector general that he understood the F.B.I. was likely to investigate the unauthorized disclosure of classified information, an inquiry he called “totally reasonable.”
Even if he believed that disclosing details about Mr. Trump’s actions was the right course of action, Mr. Comey nonetheless hurt the F.B.I., which depends on its employees to keep sensitive information private, the report said.
“Comey failed to live up to this responsibility,” the inspector general’s office concluded, then noted its earlier criticism of Mr. Comey’s handling of the Clinton email investigation.
“We have previously faulted Comey for acting unilaterally and inconsistent with department policy,” the report said. “Comey’s unauthorized disclosure of sensitive law enforcement information about the Flynn investigation merits similar criticism.”
Advertisement
