Advertisement
Supported by
A departure trims the Democratic primary field to 20, the September debate lineup is set and President Trump gets another challenger. 
“I think being able to have a voice on a debate stage, when other candidates have that, is really important,” she said, “and without it, I just didn’t see our path.”
Ms. Gillibrand said she would endorse another candidate eventually but had not yet settled on one.
This means all of the top candidates will face off directly for the first time. That’s particularly significant for former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who have not yet shared a debate stage. 
The debate will be held in Houston on Sept. 12, from 8 to 11 p.m. Eastern time, and will be broadcast on ABC and Univision.
In addition to Mr. Biden and Ms. Warren, the qualifiers are:
Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey
Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind.
Julián Castro, the former housing secretary
Senator Kamala Harris of California
Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota
Former Representative Beto O’Rourke of Texas
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont
Andrew Yang, a tech entrepreneur
Not everyone is happy about the culled debate field. Several candidates who missed the cut — including Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado and Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana — criticized the process, and Mr. Bennet’s campaign sent the D.N.C. a letter asking why it was “in an unprecedented rush to eliminate candidates from a volatile field.”
Two polls released Wednesday morning showed Mr. Biden at 32 percent, comfortably ahead of Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders. The first poll, from USA Today and Suffolk University, showed Ms. Warren at 14 percent and Mr. Sanders at 12; the second, from Quinnipiac University, showed Ms. Warren at 19 percent and Mr. Sanders at 15. 
Ms. Harris and Mr. Buttigieg were the only other candidates to break 5 percent.
Mr. Walsh is taking on Mr. Trump from the right, while Mr. Weld has campaigned from closer to the center, and Mr. Sanford has a reputation as a budget hawk. 
She promised to use executive action to ensure that federal agencies — such as the Transportation Department and the Department of Housing and Urban Development — required funding recipients to prove that projects would be fully accessible before receiving money. 
She said she would expand a grant program within the Education Department to cover more workplace accommodations and support more people. And she pledged to create new senior-level positions in the White House that would prioritize accessibility in policymaking, among other measures. 
Advertisement
