Advertisement
Supported by
The president’s supporters don’t mind his linguistic slips, but lexicographers and grammarians worry about the permanent effect on language.
At a time when nerves are stretched to the point of snapping and every political issue seems to verge on the apocalyptic — climate change; immigration; gun violence; race relations; what the president said or claimed to say or did not say about China — it might seem needlessly picayune to dwell on the writing style of the occupant of the White House. 
After he has spent nearly three years in office, Mr. Trump’s critics ask, why does he remain intent not only on making egregious errors, but also on deliberately failing to correct them? Leaving aside its splenetic tone and in-your-face ad hominem attacks, knee-jerk defensiveness and ugly, dog-whistle language, why is so much of the direct communication from the president to the world heaving with bad grammar, bad spelling, bizarre punctuation, muddy diction and inexplicable random capitalization?
“If you care about literacy and the correct and accurate use of language, then this president has got to be driving you crazy, regardless of your political point of view,” Mr. Garner, who says he is apolitical but considers himself a liberal Republican, said in an interview.
The Democrats hope that in 2020 the country will elect a new tweeter in chief, perhaps even one who knows how to spell. But Mr. Trump’s Twitter style has served him well with supporters who applaud his maverick resistance to rules. So far, no other politician has managed to pull off his sui generis mix of pugnacious content and my-way-or-the-highway approach to English composition.
Mr. Trump is not the first president whose use of language has provoked ridicule and dismay. Former President Bill Clinton claimed there were different ways to define the word “is.”
Former Vice President Dan Quayle believed the word “potato” had an “e” at the end and did not seem to care that his home mailbox identified his family as “The Quayle’s.” And former President George W. Bush once declared, with inadvertent accuracy: “Rarely is the question asked: Is our children learning?”
The president, too, appears to feel that he is the master of his prose, not the other way around.
“After having written many best selling books, and somewhat priding myself on my ability to write, it should be noted that the Fake News constantly likes to pour over my tweets looking for a mistake,” he tweeted last year, successfully managing to both dangle a modifier and misspell a four-letter word in the course of a single sentence. 
As for his creative capitalization technique, he wrote, “I capitalize certain words only for emphasis, not b/c they should be capitalized!”
“Trump thinks he can get away with stuff simply because he does it,” she said. “But he’s not king of the language. He’s not king of anything. And who took Humpty Dumpty seriously in the long run? He’s famous, of course, but only for being all cracked.”
Mr. Dreyer said that correcting the president’s errors in real time helped him channel some of the anger he feels when he thinks about Mr. Trump’s policies.
“It gives me the chance to make fun of something that I find truly horrifying,” he said. “It’s like releasing a valve on the pressure cooker.”
Beyond the questions that Mr. Trump’s Twitter feed raises about his relationship to matters of writing style, Mr. Sokolowski, the lexicographer at Merriam-Webster, said that there is a larger issue here.
Ms. Stamper said she would like to feel that even a political leader she disagrees with would show some respect for the conventions of the English language.
“Trump seems to flout the rules of everything, so we’d like him at least to have a basic grasp of English composition,” said Ms. Stamper, who said she was particularly pained by the president’s habit of calling the wall “Wall,” as if it were some sort of anthropomorphic fence — or a military acronym, like Norad.
“So just punctuate correctly!” she continued. “Put a period there instead of a comma.”
Some Trump supporters seem to regard his tweets as cryptic puzzles, à la the film “National Treasure” or the book “The Da Vinci Code.” 
Mr. Trump himself encouraged that notion when he implied that his 2017 “covfefe” tweet was not a mistake and had some sort of supersecret meaning.
No, said Ms. Stamper. 
“If you are the president of the United States, your words have power,” she continued. “Whatever you say will be judged by future generations. It would be nice if we were not judged by ‘covfefe.’”
An earlier version of this article misquoted a line from Lewis Carroll's "Through the Looking-Glass.” "A good knock-down argument" is the definition given for "glory," not "haughty."
Advertisement
