Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — Senator Joe Manchin III announced on Tuesday that he would not run for governor in his home state of West Virginia, ending speculation about the future of one of the Senate’s few moderate Democrats — and bringing relief to party leaders who feared Republicans would win his seat if he stepped down.
“Those who know me know how much I loved being the governor of West Virginia,” Mr. Manchin, who served in that role from 2005 to 2010, said in a statement. “I worked the daylights out of that job. I couldn’t wait to wake up in the Governor’s Mansion in the morning, and I didn’t want to go to bed at night, because there was always more that I could do for our state.”
But he said he could not make a decision based on what job he liked most, but rather on where he could be most useful.
Mr. Manchin’s decision was good news for Democrats, who are trying to win control of the Senate in 2020. Still, most analysts say that is a long shot, even with Mr. Manchin’s decision to stay.
The Senate math is more favorable for Democrats in 2020 than it was in 2018, when Mr. Manchin squeaked to re-election by 3 percentage points in a state President Trump won by more than 40 points. Even so, Democrats must pick up four seats to gain a majority if Mr. Trump wins re-election, and three seats if a Democrat wins the White House.
“They need a wave,” said Charlie Cook, the editor of The Cook Political Report, a nonpartisan newsletter that tracks congressional races.
Mr. Manchin’s decision to stay in the Senate could be a reflection of the shifting politics both in West Virginia, where he might have difficulty notching victories with a Republican Legislature, and in Washington, where he may be calculating that he could play an outsize role in a highly divided Senate — or even become the crucial vote if the chamber is split 50 to 50.
Mr. Manchin is a member of a vanishing breed in the Senate. Among Democrats, he is the only moderate outside Senator Doug Jones of Alabama, who won his seat in a special election in 2017 against a deeply flawed Republican: Roy S. Moore, a former judge who was accused of sexually molesting a teenage girl when he was in his 30s. Mr. Jones must now seek the seat in his own right, and is considered highly vulnerable.
Two other moderate Democrats — Joe Donnelly of Indiana and Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota — lost their races for re-election in 2018.
His signature initiative is a bill to expand background checks for nearly all gun purchases — the so-called Manchin-Toomey legislation, named for him and Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania. The measure fell to a filibuster in 2013, but a recent spate of mass shootings has revived talk of it, and Mr. Manchin and Mr. Toomey have been in negotiations with the White House in an effort to get the president on board with the legislation, or some version of it.
Mr. Manchin has also been extremely critical of West Virginia’s governor, Jim Justice, a Trump-like Republican who ran as a Democrat but later switched parties at Mr. Trump’s urging. Last year, Mr. Justice fired Mr. Manchin’s wife, Gayle, from her position as West Virginia’s secretary of education and the arts.
He also spoke of his role in Washington.
“There’s nobody trying to find the middle; everybody’s going down the sides,” Mr. Manchin said, adding, “I think it’s extremely important for me to be able to speak truth to power.”
An earlier version of this article misstated the period during which Mr. Manchin served as governor of West Virginia. It was from 2005 to 2010, not 2001 to 2005, during which time he served as the West Virginia Secretary of State.
Advertisement
