Advertisement
Supported by
WASHINGTON — Vice President Mike Pence departed his hotel overlooking stunning vistas of the Atlantic Ocean just before 8:30 a.m. Tuesday for his official visit with Michael D. Higgins, the president of Ireland. It would be quite some time before he got there.
There was the hourlong motorcade to the airport in Shannon, where he arrived at 9:30 a.m. Then the flight to Dublin, where Air Force Two landed at 10:29 a.m., and finally a short drive to Aras an Uachtarain, the presidential residence, and his meet-and-greet with Mr. Higgins, which started at 11:11 a.m.
The lengthy commute was necessary because of Mr. Pence’s choice of hotel: Rather than spending Monday night in Dublin, the vice president stayed 181 miles away by car on the other side of Ireland — at the Trump International Golf Links & Hotel in Doonbeg. The person who suggested he stay there was the hotel’s owner himself, President Trump.
“I don’t think it was a request, like a command,” Marc Short, Mr. Pence’s chief of staff, told reporters traveling with the vice president. “I think that it was a suggestion.”
And so Mr. Pence became part of a well-established trend among prominent Republicans, who since Mr. Trump rose to lead his party have become regular customers at his establishments. In total, nearly $20 million has been spent at the Trump family hotels since 2015 by various mostly Republican political groups, including Mr. Trump’s own political committees, according to a tally by the Center for Responsive Politics.
Mr. Pence’s stay at the Trump hotel — which bills itself as “a new generation of style and service” — may have been the highest-profile example of a member of Mr. Trump’s inner circle patronizing one of the president’s businesses. But it was far from the first time that a top American official in Mr. Trump’s administration had picked one of the president’s hotels when needing a place to stay or to be seen.
Over all, at least 24 of the 32 individuals who have served in Mr. Trump’s cabinet and 26 of the 53 Republicans in the Senate have been spotted at or spent money at Trump International Hotel in Washington, according to a tally maintained by Zach Everson, who tracks visits to the hotel by foreign dignitaries, members of Congress and other Republicans.
Mr. Pence has family roots in Doonbeg, and the president suggested his hotel when he heard that the vice president was traveling there. “It’s like when we went through the trip, it’s like, ‘Well, he’s going to Doonbeg because that’s where the Pence family is from,’” Mr. Short said. “It’s like, ‘Well, you should stay at my place.’”
Mr. Short said the vice president was personally covering the expenses of his wife, his mother and his sister, who are traveling with him. Still, the coterie of Secret Service personnel and other members of Mr. Pence’s traveling party staying there will mean a substantial bill paid by taxpayers — with some of that going to Mr. Trump’s hotel.
Mr. Pence, whose office said the hotel stay “was solely a decision by the Office of the Vice President,” played down any criticisms when reporters asked about it between meetings during his trip.
“I understand political attacks by Democrats, but if you have a chance to get to Doonbeg, you’ll find it’s a fairly small place and the opportunity to stay at the Trump National in Doonbeg, to accommodate the unique footprint that comes with our security detail and other personnel, made it logical,” Mr. Pence said.
Ethics experts say Donald J. Trump’s visits to properties owned, managed or branded by the Trump Organization amount to free publicity for the company and blur the line between his family business and presidential duties.
Mr. Pence stayed at the same resort in 2013 before the Trump Organization had acquired the property, the office said in a statement, and the vice president’s initial travel schedule included a night in Doonbeg after official meetings in Dublin. “At no time did the president direct our office to stay at his Doonbeg resort,” according to the statement, which was released after news reports of the president’s involvement.
But for Mr. Pence, the visit to Doonbeg was only the most recent instance in which he or his relatives have patronized Mr. Trump’s businesses.
“I have a very warm spot for Doonbeg, I will tell you that,” Mr. Trump said in March during an Oval Office visit by Prime Minister Leo Varadkar of Ireland. “And it’s just a great place. Really, a great place.”
The House Judiciary Committee has already announced that it intends to investigate how Mr. Trump appears to be driving business to his family operations. “The president’s personal financial interests are clearly shaping decisions about official U.S. government activities,” Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York and the panel’s chairman, said after Mr. Trump disclosed that he hoped to host the G7 event at Trump Doral.
Still, the patronage by the president and Republican Party leaders of Trump-owned properties comes as the Trump hotels have struggled on their own, annual financial disclosure reports by Mr. Trump suggest. Overall revenues at Trump-branded hotels in Chicago, Florida and Hawaii have lagged behind the hotel markets in those areas, in part hotel industry consultants said, because of damage to the brand Mr. Trump has caused during his tenure in the White House.
On Tuesday, Mr. Pence boarded Air Force Two just before 5 p.m. for the two-and-a-half-hour trip back to Doonbeg, where he was scheduled to have dinner with a distant cousin at Morrissey’s Pub, down the road from Mr. Trump’s golf club.
Michael D. Shear contributed reporting.
Advertisement
