Advertisement
Supported by
On Washington
WASHINGTON — Senator Mitch McConnell says he is awaiting President Trump’s proposal on new gun safety rules before swinging his chamber into action. Some of his colleagues think he’s got it backward.
After all, it is the Senate — in conjunction with the faster-moving House — that by tradition has jealously guarded its role in originating and shaping legislation, only later sending it to the president to be accepted or rejected. But today’s Senate, devoted almost exclusively to confirming Mr. Trump’s nominations, is hardly a hotbed of legislative activity.
Members of both parties say they would like that to change.
“I’m very eager to turn from nominations to legislation,” said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine. “There are important issues that are pending, and I think we could produce some terrific bills that would be signed into law.”
“They are hiding behind each other,” Senator Jeff Merkley, Democrat of Oregon, said of the dance by the White House and Mr. McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, over new gun safety proposals. “The president is spineless on these topics and changes his mind all the time, and McConnell abdicates the role of the legislature.”
“McConnell wants to protect his members from having to take a vote on issues that are important to America,” Mr. Merkley said in an interview. “That is our responsibility, to take a stand.”
The issue of gun control could also split Republicans. A few of them, including Ms. Collins and Senator Pat Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, have a history of backing bipartisan gun legislation, and others have signaled they may now join them given the urgency to act in the aftermath of shootings in Ohio and Texas. But most Republicans want nothing to do with gun measures that would also have to satisfy the Democratic majority in the House.
Mr. McConnell has chosen his usual cautious route in saying that he would await the president, to spare the Senate from wasting time on bills that would never become law. “Until the White House gives us some indication of what the president is willing to sign, we are waiting to see what it looks like,” Mr. McConnell told reporters in recent days.
But while the White House has been promising to show its hand on what it would accept when it comes to new gun laws, nothing has yet materialized, and the president seems conflicted. Democrats and a few Republicans say the best approach would be for Congress to act on its own, and deliver a measure that would present the president with a take-it-or-leave-it choice.
“I’m sure if a bill on background checks gets to the Oval Office, the president will sign it,” Mr. Merkley said.
But that’s an open question considering that Mr. Trump has previously refused to sign bills even after saying he would.
Polarizing congressional politics have severely diminished the legislative pace in the Senate, which has become an institution recognized more for no votes being taken rather than for people voting no. Republicans pummeled Democrats for treating the Senate as a legislative desert in the 2014 election when they won the majority, ridiculing Mark Begich, Democrat of Alaska, for failing to get a floor vote on a single amendment over six years, a charge that helped defeat him that year.
Now some Republicans, privately frustrated with the lack of legislative progress, worry that they may receive the same treatment at the hands of Democrats next year if they don’t start to produce. (Senate leaders often say that members demand votes right up to the moment they are asked to take a dicey one.)
Others believe Mr. McConnell is making the best of a difficult political environment.
“I think he wants to unify Republicans, and I believe the president’s support will help us do that,” said Senator John Cornyn, a top ally of Mr. McConnell as the Senate’s former No. 2 Republican. “I think it is a smart move on his part.”
“This is not easy stuff,” Mr. Cornyn added. “The majority leader has to make a decision on what is the best use of floor time and given the split in the Congress, he has made a decision that judges are an optimal use since we don’t have to be dependent on the House.”
Without question, Mr. McConnell and Senate Republicans have scored a major success on judges since confirming nominees now requires no participation by the Democratic minority and gives Republicans a powerful talking point with conservatives.
“These conservative judicial appointments will impact our nation for years to come,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who leads the Judiciary Committee and has been speeding through Trump nominees as if running an assembly line.
But the Senate is supposed to be about more than confirmations. Lawmakers on both sides would like to see it get back to legislative business. They see gun legislation, laws to rein in prescription drug prices, a trade deal with Mexico and Canada and a highway bill as possibilities.
“I believe both in the case of gun safety legislation and legislation on prescription drugs that the Senate has developed very good proposals and there have been a lot of negotiations going on in the past months and that we should proceed to the Senate floor,” Ms. Collins said.
But when it comes to legislation these days, the Senate floor is proving to be a very difficult destination to reach.
Advertisement
