A member of the intelligence community was worried.
In late July, Trump spoke on the phone with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky. During that call, the world has since learned, Trump pressed Zelensky to launch a probe into former vice president Joe Biden and his son Hunter Biden related to the latter’s past work for a Ukrainian energy company. Trump sees in that work a line of attack against Joe Biden, the leading contender to face Trump in next year’s presidential election.
I am currently at the United Nations representing our Country, but have authorized the release tomorrow of the complete, fully declassified and unredacted transcript of my phone conversation with President Zelensky of Ukraine....
“You will see,” he added in a follow-up, “it was a very friendly and totally appropriate call.” There was no quid pro quo involved, he said, adding that "[t]his is nothing more than a continuation of the Greatest and most Destructive Witch Hunt of all time!”
That is a reference to the investigation by former special counsel Robert S. Mueller III, whose final testimony before Congress about his probe occurred the day before Trump’s conversation with Zelensky.
That was what the whole fight was about in the first place. By law, intelligence community whistleblower complaints that are determined to be both credible and urgent by the inspector general go to the office of the DNI for comment before being passed to congressional oversight committees. That transfer to Congress didn’t happen. The whistleblower complaint remains solely in the possession of the Trump administration.
It’s easy to imagine something similar happening again. An insistence that the call is the only important component of the question. The release of a document purporting to exonerate Trump on that important component. A reinvigorated disparagement of the media and his political opponents — all while the more robust assessment of what happened remains in the dark.
One difference? It probably won’t remain in the dark for long. Tuesday afternoon, Rep. Adam B. Schiff (D-Calif.) announced that the whistleblower is likely to testify before the House Intelligence Committee, perhaps as early as this week.
Another difference from the Mueller scenario is the timeline. Revelations about Russian interference and contacts with Trump’s campaign that made up the bulk of Mueller’s report had been widely reported well in advance of the release of the report itself. In this case, the revelations are unfolding very quickly, making it harder for Trump and his allies to figure out how best to explain them away (something we saw with his explanations for the withholding of aid).
For obvious reasons, Trump wants to put this behind him. He wants this to join the Mueller probe and other questions about his presidency in the rearview mirror, where they can be pointed at as failed efforts by his opponents to take him down. Releasing some form of transcript of the call is an effort to do just that.
If Trump wanted to actually answer the outstanding questions, though, he’d release the whistleblower complaint. That the complaint is still closely held is perhaps more illuminating than the release of the transcript will be.
Free daily updates delivered just for you
Free daily updates delivered just for you
