Washington has been engulfed over the last week by a fast-evolving story about a whistleblower complaint regarding alleged misdeeds by President Trump. Given the complexity of the reports and all the angles involved, here’s an explainer that covers the major points.
The big, unanswered questions here are essentially:
A whistleblower from the U.S. intelligence community filed a complaint Aug. 12 that alleged some kind of wrongdoing at high levels of the U.S. government. But we haven’t seen the complaint, nor has it been shared with Congress.
Intelligence community Inspector General Michael Atkinson reviewed the whistleblower complaint and determined it was credible. Generally, that means there is corroboration beyond just the one source. Atkinson also determined that it was a matter of “urgent concern,” which is a legal threshold that requires notifying the relevant congressional committees. In this case, that would be the intelligence committees.
The details are being filled out, and it’s still unknown how many of the dots connect. But here’s where we are:
The proximity of those two events suggest there might be some kind of connection between them. Trump has said there was no quid pro quo, but he also suggested Monday that money could be withheld if Ukraine doesn’t root out “corruption.”
Lawmakers began raising concerns about the withheld aid in late August. Atkinson informed Congress about the whistleblower complaint on Sept. 9, and the aid was released on Sept. 11. The White House has downplayed the idea that the money was released due to the whistleblower complaint, saying it was motivated by the fiscal year, which was ending at the end of September.
Trump’s repeated request of Zelensky that Ukraine investigate the Bidens would form one portion of a potential quid pro quo, but our reporting indicates Trump didn’t mention foreign aid on the call. So it’s not clear what was actually part of the “promise” the whistleblower alleges.
For a variety of perhaps unrelated reasons, Trump has eyed developments in Ukraine for potential political gain.
Maguire’s defenders say he’s in a legitimate legal bind because the law doesn’t countenance this conflict between a president’s executive privilege and the disclosure requirements regarding a whistleblower complaint.
The practical impact is that Maguire, who was Senate-confirmed but for a different job, has been thrust into a high-profile position that now involves making a very difficult legal and political call for an intelligence community in which he isn’t exactly steeped.
That’s the other big question right now. It’s too early to know whether it will be proved that Trump did anything wrong. Even if we see the complaint, it’s not certain that things happened exactly as the whistleblower said they did. And just because Trump pushed for investigating the Bidens and withheld money doesn’t mean there is a provable quid pro quo.
Of course, even if Trump violated the law, we’re in the same position as we are with obstruction of justice and former Trump lawyer Michael Cohen’s campaign finance violation (in which Trump has been implicated but not accused of a crime). And that position is: Justice Department guidelines say a sitting president can’t be indicted; thus any remedy would be Congress’s responsibility, via potential impeachment proceedings.
The constitutional definition of an impeachable offense — “high crimes and misdemeanors” — is a subjective one that means basically whatever Congress determines it means. So the real question is whether serious wrongdoing by Trump in this case would rally public and political support in a way we haven’t yet seen for impeachment and/or removal from office.
In the background are other highly controversial things Trump has done, most notable being his potential obstruction of justice in the Russia investigation. But thus far, public support for impeachment is far short of a majority, and Republicans, who control the Senate and can easily prevent Trump’s removal from office, have shown no appetite for going down that road. Democrats have thus proceeded somewhat timidly. And with the 2020 election approaching, they might reason that the election would be the best way to decide how Trump is held accountable.
First of all, we need to get more details on exactly what went down — and how explicit or implicit any official actions by Trump might have been tied to Ukraine investigating the Bidens. Again, even the transcript won’t answer the key questions. And on Sunday, the Senate voted unanimously to compel the transmission of the whistleblower complaint.
Trump is also scheduled to meet with Zelensky at the United Nations on Wednesday.
Amber Phillips contributed to this report.
