The situation has Democrats inching closer to impeachment of Trump, whom they accuse of leveraging his office for personal political gain.
With everything evolving quickly, we’ve put together the following timeline. It will be updated as needed.
“The United States stands behind those who challenge these bad actors,” Pyatt adds.
The same day, Manafort is hired by Donald Trump’s presidential campaign to help in securing Republican National Convention delegates.
“They were walking out to a press conference. I said, ‘Nah, I’m not going to — or, we’re not going to give you the billion dollars.’ They said: ‘You have no authority. You’re not the president. I said, 'Call him,’ ” Biden says. “I said, ‘I’m telling you, you’re not getting the billion dollars.’ I said: ‘You’re not getting the billion. I’m going to be leaving here in, I think it was about six hours.’ I looked at them and said: ‘I’m leaving in six hours. If the prosecutor is not fired, you’re not getting the money.’ Well, son of a b----, he got fired. And they put in place someone who was solid at the time.” 
In his later July 25 phone call with Zelensky, Trump will say, according to a tough transcript provided by the White House, “The former ambassador from the United States, the woman, was bad news, and the people she was dealing with in the Ukraine were bad news so I just want to let you know that." When Zelensky thanks Trump for previously warning him about Yovanovitch (exactly when that occurred isn’t clear), Trump responds, “Well, she’s going to go through some things.”
“Biden, he calls them and says ‘Don’t you dare persecute, if you don’t fire this prosecutor’ — The prosecutor was after his son,” Trump says. “Then he said ‘If you fire the prosecutor, you’ll be okay. And if you don’t fire the prosecutor, 'we’re not giving you $2 billion in loan guarantees,’ or whatever he was supposed to give. Can you imagine if I did that?”
“I think you might want to listen, there isn’t anything wrong with listening,” Trump says. “If somebody called from a country, Norway, ‘We have information on your opponent'? Oh, I think I’d want to hear it.”
“I will answer that the activities of Burisma, the involvement of his son, Hunter Biden, and the [prosecutor general’s office] investigators on his tail, are the only, I emphasize, the only motives for organizing my resignation,” he says. Other Ukrainian officials have cast doubt on this and said the investigation had long been dormant when Shokin was removed.
“I would like you to do us a favor though because our country has been through a lot and Ukraine knows a lot about it,” Trump says before floating the CrowdStrike investigation.
He later adds: “The other thing, there’s a lot of talk about Biden’s son, that Biden stopped the prosecution and a lot of people want to find out about that so whatever you can do with the Attorney General would be great. Biden went around bragging that he stopped the prosecution so if you can look into it ... It sounds horrible to me.”
Trump repeatedly suggests Attorney General William P. Barr will be involved in working with the Ukrainian government on the investigation.
Zelensky tells Trump that his yet-to-be-named new prosecutor general “will look into the situation, specifically to the company that you mentioned in this issue" -- referring to Burisma.
“As President Trump had me make clear, we have great concerns about issues of corruption,” Pence said. “The president wants to be assured that those resources are truly making their way to the kind of investments that will contribute to security and stability in Ukraine.”
I offered to resign last night and President Trump said, "Let's talk about it tomorrow."
According to Schiff, the DNI’s office, in a letter from counsel, indicates the whistleblower complaint is being withheld because of confidential and potentially privileged communications by people outside the intelligence community. It is assumed that this refers to Trump.
“The reality is the president of the United States has every right to say to another leader of a foreign country, ‘You got to straighten up before we give you a lot of money,’ ” Giuliani said. “It is perfectly appropriate for [Trump] to ask a foreign government to investigate this massive crime that was made by a former vice president.”
“If you don’t talk about corruption, why would you give money to a country that you think is corrupt?” Trump said. “… So it’s very important that, on occasion, you speak to somebody about corruption.”
....You will see it was a very friendly and totally appropriate call. No pressure and, unlike Joe Biden and his son, NO quid pro quo! This is nothing more than a continuation of the Greatest and most Destructive Witch Hunt of all time!
Trump is scheduled to meet with Zelensky at the United Nations and hold a press conference shortly thereafter.
